Aeronautical decision-making (ADM) is decision-making
in a unique environment—aviation. It is a systematic
approach to the mental process used by pilots to consistently
determine the best course of action in response to a given set
of circumstances. It is what a pilot intends to do based on the
latest information he or she has.
Aeronautical
Decision-Making
Chapter 2

Figure 2-1. The percentage of aviation accidents as they relate to the different phases of flight. Note that the greatest percentage of
accidents take place during a minor percentage of the total flight.
Flight Time
2%
Flight Time
83%
Flight Time
15%
Preflights/
Taxi
Takeoff/
Initial Climb
Climb
Cruise
Descent
Maneuvering
Approach
Landing
Other
3.3%
3.5%
23.4%
15.7%
2.6%
13%
9.7%
24.1%
4.7%
Percentage of General Aviation Accidents
The importance of learning and understanding effective
ADM skills cannot be overemphasized. While progress is
continually being made in the advancement of pilot training
methods, aircraft equipment and systems, and services
for pilots, accidents still occur. Despite all the changes in
technology to improve flight safety, one factor remains the
same: the human factor which leads to errors. It is estimated
that approximately 80 percent of all aviation accidents are
related to human factors and the vast majority of these
accidents occur during landing (24.1 percent) and takeoff
(23.4 percent). [Figure 2-1]
ADM is a systematic approach to risk assessment and stress
management. To understand ADM is to also understand
how personal attitudes can influence decision-making and
how those attitudes can be modified to enhance safety in the
flight deck. It is important to understand the factors that cause
humans to make decisions and how the decision-making
process not only works, but can be improved.
This chapter focuses on helping the pilot improve his or
her ADM skills with the goal of mitigating the risk factors
associated with flight. Advisory Circular (AC) 60-22,
“Aeronautical Decision-Making,” provides background
references, definitions, and other pertinent information about
ADM training in the general aviation (GA) environment.
[Figure 2-2]
History of ADM
For over 25 years, the importance of good pilot judgment, or
aeronautical decision-making (ADM), has been recognized
as critical to the safe operation of aircraft, as well as accident
avoidance. The airline industry, motivated by the need to
reduce accidents caused by human factors, developed the first
training programs based on improving ADM. Crew resource
management (CRM) training for flight crews is focused on
the effective use of all available resources: human resources,
hardware, and information supporting ADM to facilitate crew
cooperation and improve decision-making. The goal of all
flight crews is good ADM and the use of CRM is one way
to make good decisions.
Research in this area prompted the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) to produce training directed at
improving the decision-making of pilots and led to current
FAA regulations that require that decision-making be taught
as part of the pilot training curriculum. ADM research,
development, and testing culminated in 1987 with the
publication of six manuals oriented to the decision-making
needs of variously rated pilots. These manuals provided
multifaceted materials designed to reduce the number
of decision-related accidents. The effectiveness of these
materials was validated in independent studies where student
pilots received such training in conjunction with the standard
flying curriculum. When tested, the pilots who had received
ADM-training made fewer in-flight errors than those who had

Figure 2-2. Advisory Circular (AC) 60-22, “Aeronautical Decision Making,” carries a wealth of information for the pilot to learn.
not received ADM training. The differences were statistically
significant and ranged from about 10 to 50 percent fewer
judgment errors. In the operational environment, an operator
flying about 400,000 hours annually demonstrated a 54
percent reduction in accident rate after using these materials
for recurrency training.
Contrary to popular opinion, good judgment can be taught.
Tradition held that good judgment was a natural by-product
of experience, but as pilots continued to log accident-free
flight hours, a corresponding increase of good judgment
was assumed. Building upon the foundation of conventional
decision-making, ADM enhances the process to decrease the
probability of human error and increase the probability of a
safe flight. ADM provides a structured, systematic approach
to analyzing changes that occur during a flight and how these
changes might affect the safe outcome of a flight. The ADM
process addresses all aspects of decision-making in the flight
deck and identifies the steps involved in good decision-making.
Steps for good decision-making are:
Identifying personal attitudes hazardous to safe flight
Learning behavior modification techniques
Learning how to recognize and cope with stress
Developing risk assessment skills
Using all resources
Evaluating the effectiveness of one’s ADM skills
Risk Management
The goal of risk management is to proactively identify
safety-related hazards and mitigate the associated risks. Risk
management is an important component of ADM. When a
pilot follows good decision-making practices, the inherent risk
in a flight is reduced or even eliminated. The ability to make
good decisions is based upon direct or indirect experience
and education. The formal risk management decision-making
process involves six steps as shown in Figure 2-3.
Consider automotive seat belt use. In just two decades, seat
belt use has become the norm, placing those who do not
wear seat belts outside the norm, but this group may learn to
wear a seat belt by either direct or indirect experience. For
example, a driver learns through direct experience about the
value of wearing a seat belt when he or she is involved in a car
accident that leads to a personal injury. An indirect learning
experience occurs when a loved one is injured during a car
accident because he or she failed to wear a seat belt.
As you work through the ADM cycle, it is important to
remember the four fundamental principles of risk management.

Figure 2-3. Risk management decision-making process.
Identify
Hazards
Assess
Risks
Analyze
Controls
Make Control
Decisions
Monitor
Results
Use
Controls
START
RISK
MANAGEMENT
PROCESS
1. 	 Accept no unnecessary risk. Flying is not possible
without risk, but unnecessary risk comes without a
corresponding return. If you are flying a new airplane
for the first time, you might determine that the risk
of making that flight in low visibility conditions is
unnecessary.
2. 	 Make risk decisions at the appropriate level. Risk
decisions should be made by the person who can
develop and implement risk controls. Remember
that you are pilot-in-command, so never let anyone
else—not ATC and not your passengers—make risk
decisions for you.
3. 	 Accept risk when benefits outweigh dangers (costs).
In any flying activity, it is necessary to accept some
degree of risk. A day with good weather, for example,
is a much better time to fly an unfamiliar airplane for
the first time than a day with low IFR conditions.
4. 	 Integrate risk management into planning at all levels.
Because risk is an unavoidable part of every flight,
safety requires the use of appropriate and effective risk
management not just in the preflight planning stage,
but in all stages of the flight.
While poor decision-making in everyday life does not always
lead to tragedy, the margin for error in aviation is thin. Since
ADM enhances management of an aeronautical environment,
all pilots should become familiar with and employ ADM.
Crew Resource Management (CRM) and
Single-Pilot Resource Management
While CRM focuses on pilots operating in crew environments,
many of the concepts apply to single-pilot operations. Many
CRM principles have been successfully applied to single-pilot
aircraft and led to the development of Single-Pilot Resource
Management (SRM). SRM is defined as the art and science
of managing all the resources (both on-board the aircraft
and from outside sources) available to a single pilot (prior
to and during flight) to ensure the successful outcome of the
flight. SRM includes the concepts of ADM, risk management
(RM), task management (TM), automation management
(AM), controlled flight into terrain (CFIT) awareness, and
situational awareness (SA). SRM training helps the pilot
maintain situational awareness by managing the automation
and associated aircraft control and navigation tasks. This
enables the pilot to accurately assess and manage risk and
make accurate and timely decisions.
SRM is all about helping pilots learn how to gather
information, analyze it, and make decisions. Although the
flight is coordinated by a single person and not an onboard
flight crew, the use of available resources such as auto-pilot
and air traffic control (ATC) replicates the principles of CRM.
Hazard and Risk
Two defining elements of ADM are hazard and risk. Hazard
is a real or perceived condition, event, or circumstance that a
pilot encounters. When faced with a hazard, the pilot makes
an assessment of that hazard based upon various factors. The
pilot assigns a value to the potential impact of the hazard,
which qualifies the pilot’s assessment of the hazard—risk.
Therefore, risk is an assessment of the single or cumulative
hazard facing a pilot; however, different pilots see hazards
differently. For example, the pilot arrives to preflight and
discovers a small, blunt type nick in the leading edge at the
middle of the aircraft’s prop. Since the aircraft is parked on
the tarmac, the nick was probably caused by another aircraft’s
prop wash blowing some type of debris into the propeller.
The nick is the hazard (a present condition). The risk is prop
fracture if the engine is operated with damage to a prop blade.
The seasoned pilot may see the nick as a low risk. He
realizes this type of nick diffuses stress over a large area, is
located in the strongest portion of the propeller, and based
on experience; he does not expect it to propagate a crack that
can lead to high risk problems. He does not cancel his flight.

Figure 2-4. The five hazardous attitudes identified through past and contemporary study.
The Five Hazardous Attitudes
Antidote
Anti-authority: “Don’t tell me.”
This attitude is found in people who do not like anyone telling them what to do. In a
sense, they are saying, “No one can tell me what to do.” They may be resentful of
having someone tell them what to do or may regard rules, regulations, and procedures
as silly or unnecessary. However, it is always your prerogative to question authority
if you feel it is in error.
Impulsivity: “Do it quickly.”
This is the attitude of people who frequently feel the need to do something, anything,
immediately. They do not stop to think about what they are about to do, they do not
select the best alternative, and they do the first thing that comes to mind.
Invulnerability: “It won’t happen to me.”
Many people falsely believe that accidents happen to others, but never to them. They
know accidents can happen, and they know that anyone can be affected. However,
they never really feel or believe that they will be personally involved. Pilots who think
this way are more likely to take chances and increase risk.
Macho: “I can do it.”
Pilots who are always trying to prove that they are better than anyone else think, “I can
do it—I'll show them.” Pilots with this type of attitude will try to prove themselves by
taking risks in order to impress others. While this pattern is thought to be a male
characteristic, women are equally susceptible.
Resignation: “What’s the use?”
Pilots who think, “What’s the use?” do not see themselves as being able to make a
great deal of difference in what happens to them. When things go well, the pilot is apt
to think that it is good luck. When things go badly, the pilot may feel that someone is
out to get them or attribute it to bad luck. The pilot will leave the action to others, for
better or worse. Sometimes, such pilots will even go along with unreasonable requests
just to be a "nice guy."
Follow the rules. They are usually right.
Not so fast. Think first.
It could happen to me.
Taking chances is foolish.
I’m not helpless. I can make a difference.
The inexperienced pilot may see the nick as a high risk factor
because he is unsure of the affect the nick will have on the
operation of the prop, and he has been told that damage to
a prop could cause a catastrophic failure. This assessment
leads him to cancel his flight.
Therefore, elements or factors affecting individuals are
different and profoundly impact decision-making. These
are called human factors and can transcend education,
experience, health, physiological aspects, etc.
Another example of risk assessment was the flight of a
Beechcraft King Air equipped with deicing and anti-icing.
The pilot deliberately flew into moderate to severe icing
conditions while ducking under cloud cover. A prudent pilot
would assess the risk as high and beyond the capabilities of
the aircraft, yet this pilot did the opposite. Why did the pilot
take this action?
Past experience prompted the action. The pilot had
successfully flown into these conditions repeatedly although
the icing conditions were previously forecast 2,000 feet above
the surface. This time, the conditions were forecast from the
surface. Since the pilot was in a hurry and failed to factor
in the difference between the forecast altitudes, he assigned
a low risk to the hazard and took a chance. He and the
passengers died from a poor risk assessment of the situation.
Hazardous Attitudes and Antidotes
Being fit to fly depends on more than just a pilot’s physical
condition and recent experience. For example, attitude
affects the quality of decisions. Attitude is a motivational
predisposition to respond to people, situations, or events in a
given manner. Studies have identified five hazardous attitudes
that can interfere with the ability to make sound decisions
and exercise authority properly: anti-authority, impulsivity,
invulnerability, macho, and resignation. [Figure 2-4]
Hazardous attitudes contribute to poor pilot judgment but
can be effectively counteracted by redirecting the hazardous
attitude so that correct action can be taken. Recognition of
hazardous thoughts is the first step toward neutralizing them.
After recognizing a thought as hazardous, the pilot should
label it as hazardous, then state the corresponding antidote.
Antidotes should be memorized for each of the hazardous
attitudes so they automatically come to mind when needed.

Figure 2-5. This risk matrix can be used for almost any operation
by assigning likelihood and consequence. In the case presented,
the pilot assigned a likelihood of occasional and the severity as
catastrophic. As one can see, this falls in the high risk area.
Catastrophic
Critical
Marginal
Negligible
Improbable
Remote
Occasional
Probable
Risk Assessment Matrix
      Likelihood
Severity
Serious
Low
Medium
Serious
Serious
High
High
High
Risk
During each flight, the single pilot makes many decisions
under hazardous conditions. To fly safely, the pilot needs
to assess the degree of risk and determine the best course of
action to mitigate the risk.
Assessing Risk
For the single pilot, assessing risk is not as simple as it sounds.
For example, the pilot acts as his or her own quality control
in making decisions. If a fatigued pilot who has flown 16
hours is asked if he or she is too tired to continue flying, the
answer may be “no.” Most pilots are goal oriented and when
asked to accept a flight, there is a tendency to deny personal
limitations while adding weight to issues not germane to the
mission. For example, pilots of helicopter emergency services
(EMS) have been known (more than other groups) to make
flight decisions that add significant weight to the patient’s
welfare. These pilots add weight to intangible factors (the
patient in this case) and fail to appropriately quantify actual
hazards, such as fatigue or weather, when making flight
decisions. The single pilot who has no other crew member
for consultation must wrestle with the intangible factors that
draw one into a hazardous position. Therefore, he or she has
a greater vulnerability than a full crew.
Examining National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB)
reports and other accident research can help a pilot learn to
assess risk more effectively. For example, the accident rate
during night visual flight rules (VFR) decreases by nearly
50 percent once a pilot obtains 100 hours and continues to
decrease until the 1,000 hour level. The data suggest that for
the first 500 hours, pilots flying VFR at night might want to
establish higher personal limitations than are required by the
regulations and, if applicable, apply instrument flying skills
in this environment.
Several risk assessment models are available to assist in the
process of assessing risk. The models, all taking slightly
different approaches, seek a common goal of assessing risk
in an objective manner. The most basic tool is the risk matrix.
[Figure 2-5] It assesses two items: the likelihood of an event
occurring and the consequence of that event.
Likelihood of an Event
Likelihood is nothing more than taking a situation and
determining the probability of its occurrence. It is rated as
probable, occasional, remote, or improbable. For example, a
pilot is flying from point A to point B (50 miles) in marginal
visual flight rules (MVFR) conditions. The likelihood of
encountering potential instrument meteorological conditions
(IMC) is the first question the pilot needs to answer. The
experiences of other pilots, coupled with the forecast, might
cause the pilot to assign “occasional” to determine the
probability of encountering IMC.
The following are guidelines for making assignments.
Probable—an event will occur several times
Occasional—an event will probably occur sometime
Remote—an event is unlikely to occur, but is possible
Improbable—an event is highly unlikely to occur
Severity of an Event
The next element is the severity or consequence of a pilot’s
action(s). It can relate to injury and/or damage. If the
individual in the example above is not an instrument rated
pilot, what are the consequences of him or her encountering
inadvertent IMC conditions? In this case, because the pilot
is not IFR rated, the consequences are catastrophic. The
following are guidelines for this assignment.
Catastrophic—results in fatalities, total loss
Critical—severe injury, major damage
Marginal—minor injury, minor damage
Negligible—less than minor injury, less than minor
system damage
Simply connecting the two factors as shown in Figure 2-5
indicates the risk is high and the pilot must either not fly or
fly only after finding ways to mitigate, eliminate, or control
the risk.
Although the matrix in Figure 2-5 provides a general viewpoint
of a generic situation, a more comprehensive program can be
made that is tailored to a pilot’s flying. [Figure 2-6] This
program includes a wide array of aviation-related activities
specific to the pilot and assesses health, fatigue, weather,

RISK ASSESSMENT

Column total
Column total
SLEEP
1. Did not sleep well or less than 8 hours
2. Slept well
HOW DO YOU FEEL?
1. Have a cold or ill
2. Feel great
3. Feel a bit off
WEATHER AT TERMINATION
1. Greater than 5 miles visibility and 3,000 feet

ceilings
2. At least 3 miles visibility and 1,000 feet ceilings,

but less than 3,000 feet ceilings and 5 miles

visibility
3. IMC conditions

HOW IS THE DAY GOING?
1. Seems like one thing after another (late,

making errors, out of step)
2. Great day
IS THE FLIGHT
1. Day?
2. Night?
PLANNING
1. Rush to get off ground
2. No hurry
3. Used charts and computer to assist
4. Used computer program for all planning
Yes

No
5. Did you verify weight and balance?
Yes

No
6. Did you evaluate performance?

Yes

No
7. Do you brief your passangers on the
Yes

ground and in flight?

No
Pilot’s Name

Flight From
To
TOTAL SCORE
Not complex flight
Exercise caution
Area of concern
Endangerment
Low risk
 Figure 2-6. Example of a more comprehensive risk assessment program.

capabilities, etc. The scores are added and the overall score
falls into various ranges, with the range representative of
actions that a pilot imposes upon himself or herself.
Mitigating Risk
Risk assessment is only part of the equation. After
determining the level of risk, the pilot needs to mitigate the
risk. For example, the pilot flying from point A to point B (50
miles) in MVFR conditions has several ways to reduce risk:
Wait for the weather to improve to good visual flight
rules (VFR) conditions.
Take an instrument-rated pilot.
Delay the flight.
Cancel the flight.
Drive.
One of the best ways single pilots can mitigate risk is to use
the IMSAFE checklist to determine physical and mental
readiness for flying:
1. 	 Illness—Am I sick? Illness is an obvious pilot risk.
2. 	 Medication—Am I taking any medicines that might
affect my judgment or make me drowsy?
3. 	 Stress—Am I under psychological pressure from the
job? Do I have money, health, or family problems?
Stress causes concentration and performance problems.
While the regulations list medical conditions that
require grounding, stress is not among them. The pilot
should consider the effects of stress on performance.
Alcohol—Have I been drinking within 8 hours?
Within 24 hours? As little as one ounce of liquor, one
bottle of beer, or four ounces of wine can impair flying
skills. Alcohol also renders a pilot more susceptible
to disorientation and hypoxia.
5. 	 Fatigue—Am I tired and not adequately rested?
Fatigue continues to be one of the most insidious
hazards to flight safety, as it may not be apparent to
a pilot until serious errors are made.
6. 	 Emotion—Am I emotionally upset?
The PAVE Checklist
Another way to mitigate risk is to perceive hazards. By
incorporating the PAVE checklist into preflight planning,
the pilot divides the risks of flight into four categories: Pilotin-command (PIC), Aircraft, enVironment, and External
pressures (PAVE) which form part of a pilot’s decisionmaking process.
With the PAVE checklist, pilots have a simple way to
remember each category to examine for risk prior to each flight.
Once a pilot identifies the risks of a flight, he or she needs
to decide whether the risk, or combination of risks, can be
managed safely and successfully. If not, make the decision to
cancel the flight. If the pilot decides to continue with the flight,
he or she should develop strategies to mitigate the risks. One
way a pilot can control the risks is to set personal minimums
for items in each risk category. These are limits unique to that
individual pilot’s current level of experience and proficiency.
For example, the aircraft may have a maximum crosswind
component of 15 knots listed in the aircraft flight manual
(AFM), and the pilot has experience with 10 knots of direct
crosswind. It could be unsafe to exceed a 10 knot crosswind
component without additional training. Therefore, the 10 knot
crosswind experience level is that pilot’s personal limitation
until additional training with a certificated flight instructor
(CFI) provides the pilot with additional experience for flying
in crosswinds that exceed 10 knots.
One of the most important concepts that safe pilots
understand is the difference between what is “legal” in terms
of the regulations, and what is “smart” or “safe” in terms of
pilot experience and proficiency.
P = Pilot in Command (PIC)
The pilot is one of the risk factors in a flight. The pilot must
ask, “Am I ready for this trip?” in terms of experience,
recency, currency, physical, and emotional condition. The
IMSAFE checklist provides the answers.
A = Aircraft
What limitations will the aircraft impose upon the trip? Ask
the following questions:
Is this the right aircraft for the flight?
Am I familiar with and current in this aircraft? Aircraft
performance figures and the AFM are based on a brand
new aircraft flown by a professional test pilot. Keep
that in mind while assessing personal and aircraft
performance.
Is this aircraft equipped for the flight? Instruments?
Lights? Navigation and communication equipment
adequate?
Can this aircraft use the runways available for the trip
with an adequate margin of safety under the conditions
to be flown?
Can this aircraft carry the planned load?
Can this aircraft operate at the altitudes needed for the
trip?
Does this aircraft have sufficient fuel capacity, with
reserves, for trip legs planned?

guidance? Is the terminal airport equipped with them?
Are they working? Will the pilot need to use the radio
to activate the airport lights?
Check the Notices to Airmen (NOTAM) for closed
runways or airports. Look for runway or beacon lights
out, nearby towers, etc.
Choose the flight route wisely. An engine failure gives
the nearby airports supreme importance.
Are there shorter or obstructed fields at the destination
and/or alternate airports?
Airspace
If the trip is over remote areas, is there appropriate
clothing, water, and survival gear onboard in the event
of a forced landing?
If the trip includes flying over water or unpopulated
areas with the chance of losing visual reference to the
horizon, the pilot must be prepared to fly IFR.
Check the airspace and any temporary flight restriction
(TFRs) along the route of flight.
Nighttime
Night flying requires special consideration.
If the trip includes flying at night over water or
unpopulated areas with the chance of losing visual
reference to the horizon, the pilot must be prepared
to fly IFR.
Will the flight conditions allow a safe emergency
landing at night?
Perform preflight check of all aircraft lights, interior
and exterior, for a night flight. Carry at least two
flashlights—one for exterior preflight and a smaller
one that can be dimmed and kept nearby.
E = External Pressures
External pressures are influences external to the flight that
create a sense of pressure to complete a flight—often at the
expense of safety. Factors that can be external pressures
include the following:
Someone waiting at the airport for the flight’s arrival
A passenger the pilot does not want to disappoint
The desire to demonstrate pilot qualifications
The desire to impress someone (Probably the two most
dangerous words in aviation are “Watch this!”)
The desire to satisfy a specific personal goal (“gethome-itis,” “get-there-itis,” and “let’s-go-itis”)
The pilot’s general goal-completion orientation
Does the fuel quantity delivered match the fuel
quantity ordered?
V = EnVironment
Weather
Weather is a major environmental consideration. Earlier it was
suggested pilots set their own personal minimums, especially
when it comes to weather. As pilots evaluate the weather for
a particular flight, they should consider the following:
What is the current ceiling and visibility? In
mountainous terrain, consider having higher
minimums for ceiling and visibility, particularly if
the terrain is unfamiliar.
Consider the possibility that the weather may be
different than forecast. Have alternative plans and
be ready and willing to divert, should an unexpected
change occur.
Consider the winds at the airports being used and the
strength of the crosswind component.
If flying in mountainous terrain, consider whether
there are strong winds aloft. Strong winds in
mountainous terrain can cause severe turbulence and
downdrafts and be very hazardous for aircraft even
when there is no other significant weather.
Are there any thunderstorms present or forecast?
If there are clouds, is there any icing, current or
forecast? What is the temperature/dew point spread
and the current temperature at altitude? Can descent
be made safely all along the route?
If icing conditions are encountered, is the pilot
experienced at operating the aircraft’s deicing or
anti-icing equipment? Is this equipment in good
condition and functional? For what icing conditions
is the aircraft rated, if any?
Terrain
Evaluation of terrain is another important component of
analyzing the flight environment.
To avoid terrain and obstacles, especially at night or
in low visibility, determine safe altitudes in advance
by using the altitudes shown on VFR and IFR charts
during preflight planning.
Use maximum elevation figures (MEFs) and other
easily obtainable data to minimize chances of an
inflight collision with terrain or obstacles.
Airport
What lights are available at the destination and
alternate airports? VASI/PAPI or ILS glideslope

A pilot must continually make decisions about competency,
condition of health, mental and emotional state, level of fatigue,
and many other variables. For example, a pilot may be called
early in the morning to make a long flight. If a pilot has had only
a few hours of sleep and is concerned that the congestion
being experienced could be the onset of a cold, it would be
prudent to consider if the flight could be accomplished safely.
A pilot had only 4 hours of sleep the night before being asked
by the boss to fly to a meeting in a city 750 miles away. The
reported weather was marginal and not expected to improve.
After assessing fitness as a pilot, it was decided that it would
not be wise to make the flight. The boss was initially unhappy,
but later convinced by the pilot that the risks involved were
unacceptable.
Pilot
This encompasses many elements not pilot or airplane related.
It can include such factors as weather, air traffic control,
navigational aids (NAVAIDS), terrain, takeoff and landing
areas, and surrounding obstacles. Weather is one element that
can change drastically over time and distance.
A pilot was landing a small airplane just after a heavy jet had
departed a parallel runway. The pilot assumed that wake
turbulence would not be a problem since landings had been
performed under similar circumstances. Due to a combination
of prevailing winds and wake turbulence from the heavy jet
drifting across the landing runway, the airplane made a hard
landing. The pilot made an error when assessing the flight
environment.
Environment
A pilot will frequently base decisions on the evaluations of the
aircraft, such as performance, equipment, or airworthiness.
During a preflight, a pilot noticed a small amount of oil dripping
from the bottom of the cowling. Although the quantity of oil
seemed insignificant at the time, the pilot decided to delay the
takeoff and have a mechanic check the source of the oil.
The pilot’s good judgment was confirmed when the mechanic
found that one of the oil cooler hose fittings was loose.
External pressures
The interaction between the pilot, airplane, and the environment
is greatly influenced by the purpose of each flight operation.
The pilot must evaluate the three previous areas to decide on
the desirability of undertaking or continuing the flight as planned.
It is worth asking why the flight is being made, how critical is it to
maintain the schedule, and is the trip worth the risks?

On a ferry flight to deliver an airplane from the factory, in
marginal weather conditions, the pilot calculated the
groundspeed and determined that the airplane would arrive at
the destination with only 10 minutes of fuel remaining. The pilot
was determined to keep on schedule by trying to “stretch” the
fuel supply instead of landing to refuel. After landing with low
fuel state, the pilot realized that this could have easily resulted
in an emergency landing in deteriorating weather conditions.
This was a chance that was not worth taking to keep the
planned schedule.

Figure 2-7. The PAVE checklist.
Emotional pressure associated with acknowledging
that skill and experience levels may be lower than a
pilot would like them to be. Pride can be a powerful
external factor!
Managing External Pressures
Management of external pressure is the single most important
key to risk management because it is the one risk factor
category that can cause a pilot to ignore all the other risk
factors. External pressures put time-related pressure on the
pilot and figure into a majority of accidents.
The use of personal standard operating procedures (SOPs) is
one way to manage external pressures. The goal is to supply a
release for the external pressures of a flight. These procedures
include but are not limited to:
Allow time on a trip for an extra fuel stop or to make
an unexpected landing because of weather.
Have alternate plans for a late arrival or make backup
airline reservations for must-be-there trips.
For really important trips, plan to leave early enough
so that there would still be time to drive to the
destination, if necessary.
Advise those who are waiting at the destination that
the arrival may be delayed. Know how to notify them
when delays are encountered.
Manage passengers’ expectations. Make sure
passengers know that they might not arrive on a firm
schedule, and if they must arrive by a certain time,
they should make alternative plans.
Eliminate pressure to return home, even on a casual
day flight, by carrying a small overnight kit containing
prescriptions, contact lens solutions, toiletries, or other
necessities on every flight.
The key to managing external pressure is to be ready for
and accept delays. Remember that people get delayed when
traveling on airlines, driving a car, or taking a bus. The pilot’s
goal is to manage risk, not create hazards. [Figure 2-7]
Human Factors
Why are human conditions, such as fatigue, complacency
and stress, so important in aviation? These conditions, along
with many others, are called human factors. Human factors
directly cause or contribute to many aviation accidents and

Figure 2-8. Human factors effects pilots, aviation maintenance technicians (AMTs) and air traffic control (ATC).
have been documented as a primary contributor to more than
70 percent of aircraft accidents.
Typically, human factor incidents/accidents are associated
with flight operations but recently have also become a major
concern in aviation maintenance and air traffic management
as well. [Figure 2-8] Over the past several years, the FAA has
made the study and research of human factors a top priority
by working closely with engineers, pilots, mechanics, and
ATC to apply the latest knowledge about human factors in
an effort to help operators and maintainers improve safety
and efficiency in their daily operations.
Human factors science, or human factors technologies,
is a multidisciplinary field incorporating contributions
from psychology, engineering, industrial design, statistics,
operations research, and anthropometry. It is a term that
covers the science of understanding the properties of
human capability, the application of this understanding to
the design, development and deployment of systems and
services, and the art of ensuring successful application of
human factor principles into all aspects of aviation to include
pilots, ATC, and aviation maintenance. Human factors is
often considered synonymous with CRM or maintenance
resource management (MRM) but is really much broader in
both its knowledge base and scope. Human factors involves
gathering research specific to certain situations (i.e., flight,
maintenance, stress levels, knowledge) about human abilities,
limitations, and other characteristics and applying it to tool
design, machines, systems, tasks, jobs, and environments
to produce safe, comfortable, and effective human use. The
entire aviation community benefits greatly from human
factors research and development as it helps better understand
how humans can most safely and efficiently perform their
jobs and improve the tools and systems in which they interact.
Human Behavior
Studies of human behavior have tried to determine an
individual’s predisposition to taking risks and the level of
an individual’s involvement in accidents. In 1951, a study
regarding injury-prone children was published by Elizabeth
Mechem Fuller and Helen B. Baune, of the University of
Minnesota. The study was comprised of two separate groups
of second grade students. Fifty-five students were considered
accident repeaters and 48 students had no accidents. Both
groups were from the same school of 600 and their family
demographics were similar.
The accident-free group showed a superior knowledge
of safety, was considered industrious and cooperative

with others, but were not considered physically inclined.
The accident-repeater group had better gymnastic skills,
was considered aggressive and impulsive, demonstrated
rebellious behavior when under stress, were poor losers, and
liked to be the center of attention. One interpretation of this
data—an adult predisposition to injury stems from childhood
behavior and environment—leads to the conclusion that
any pilot group should be comprised only of pilots who are
safety-conscious, industrious, and cooperative.
Clearly, this is not only an inaccurate inference, it is
impossible. Pilots are drawn from the general population and
exhibit all types of personality traits. Thus, it is important that
good decision-making skills be taught to all pilots.
Historically, the term “pilot error” has been used to describe
an accident in which an action or decision made by the
pilot was the cause or a contributing factor that led to the
accident. This definition also includes the pilot’s failure
to make a correct decision or take proper action. From a
broader perspective, the phrase “human factors related” more
aptly describes these accidents. A single decision or event
does not lead to an accident, but a series of events and the
resultant decisions together form a chain of events leading
to an outcome.
In his article “Accident-Prone Pilots,” Dr. Patrick R. Veillette
uses the history of “Captain Everyman” to demonstrate how
aircraft accidents are caused more by a chain of poor choices
rather than one single poor choice. In the case of Captain
Everyman, after a gear-up landing accident, he became
involved in another accident while taxiing a Beech 58P Baron
out of the ramp. Interrupted by a radio call from the dispatcher,
Everyman neglected to complete the fuel cross-feed check
before taking off. Everyman, who was flying solo, left the
right-fuel selector in the cross-feed position. Once aloft and
cruising, he noticed a right roll tendency and corrected with
aileron trim. He did not realize that both engines were feeding
off the left wing’s tank, making the wing lighter.
After two hours of flight, the right engine quit when
Everyman was flying along a deep canyon gorge. While he
was trying to troubleshoot the cause of the right engine’s
failure, the left engine quit. Everyman landed the aircraft on
a river sand bar but it sank into ten feet of water.
Several years later Everyman flew a de Havilland Twin
Otter to deliver supplies to a remote location. When he
returned to home base and landed, the aircraft veered sharply
to the left, departed the runway, and ran into a marsh 375
feet from the runway. The airframe and engines sustained
considerable damage. Upon inspecting the wreck, accident
investigators found the nose wheel steering tiller in the fully
deflected position. Both the after takeoff and before landing
checklists require the tiller to be placed in the neutral position.
Everyman had overlooked this item.
Now, is Everyman accident prone or just unlucky? Skipping
details on a checklist appears to be a common theme in the
preceding accidents. While most pilots have made similar
mistakes, these errors were probably caught prior to a mishap
due to extra margin, good warning systems, a sharp copilot,
or just good luck. What makes a pilot less prone to accidents?
The successful pilot possesses the ability to concentrate,
manage workloads, and monitor and perform several
simultaneous tasks. Some of the latest psychological
screenings used in aviation test applicants for their ability
to multitask, measuring both accuracy, as well as the
individual’s ability to focus attention on several subjects
simultaneously. The FAA oversaw an extensive research
study on the similarities and dissimilarities of accident-free
pilots and those who were not. The project surveyed over
4,000 pilots, half of whom had “clean” records while the
other half had been involved in an accident.
Five traits were discovered in pilots prone to having
accidents. These pilots:
Have disdain toward rules
Have very high correlation between accidents on their
flying records and safety violations on their driving
records
Frequently fall into the “thrill and adventure seeking”
personality category
Are impulsive rather than methodical and disciplined,
both in their information gathering and in the speed
and selection of actions to be taken
Have a disregard for or tend to under  utilize outside
sources of information, including copilots, flight
attendants, flight service personnel, flight instructors,
and ATC
The Decision-Making Process
An understanding of the decision-making process provides
the pilot with a foundation for developing ADM and SRM
skills. While some situations, such as engine failure, require an
immediate pilot response using established procedures, there is
usually time during a flight to analyze any changes that occur,
gather information, and assess risks before reaching a decision.
Risk management and risk intervention is much more than the
simple definitions of the terms might suggest. Risk management
and risk intervention are decision-making processes designed
to systematically identify hazards, assess the degree of risk, and

Figure 2-9. The Five Ps checklist.
THE PLAN
THE PLANE
THE PILOT
THE
PASSENGERS
THE
PROGRAMMING
The SRM Five “Ps” Check
determine the best course of action. These processes involve
the identification of hazards, followed by assessments of the
risks, analysis of the controls, making control decisions, using
the controls, and monitoring the results.
The steps leading to this decision constitute a decisionmaking process. Three models of a structured framework
for problem-solving and decision-making are the 5P, the 3P
using PAVE, CARE and TEAM, and the DECIDE models.
They provide assistance in organizing the decision process.
All these models have been identified as helpful to the single
pilot in organizing critical decisions.

Single-Pilot Resource Management (SRM)
Single-Pilot Resource Management (SRM) is about how to
gather information, analyze it, and make decisions. Learning
how to identify problems, analyze the information, and make
informed and timely decisions is not as straightforward as the
training involved in learning specific maneuvers. Learning
how to judge a situation and “how to think” in the endless
variety of situations encountered while flying out in the “real
world” is more difficult.
There is no one right answer in ADM, rather each pilot is
expected to analyze each situation in light of experience
level, personal minimums, and current physical and mental
readiness level, and make his or her own decision.
The 5 Ps Check
SRM sounds good on paper, but it requires a way for pilots
to understand and use it in their daily flights. One practical
application is called the “Five Ps (5 Ps).” [Figure 2-9] The
5 Ps consist of “the Plan, the Plane, the Pilot, the Passengers,
and the Programming.” Each of these areas consists of a set
of challenges and opportunities that every pilot encounters.
Each challenge and opportunity can substantially increase or
decrease the risk of successfully completing the flight based
on the pilot’s ability to make informed and timely decisions.
The 5 Ps are used to evaluate the pilot’s current situation at
key decision points during the flight or when an emergency
arises. These decision points include preflight, pretakeoff,
hourly or at the midpoint of the flight, pre-descent, and just
prior to the final approach fix or for VFR operations, just
prior to entering the traffic pattern.
The 5 Ps are based on the idea that pilots have essentially
five variables that impact his or her environment and forcing
him or her to make a single critical decision, or several less
critical decisions, that when added together can create a
critical outcome. These variables are the Plan, the Plane, the
Pilot, the Passengers, and the Programming. This concept
stems from the belief that current decision-making models
tended to be reactionary in nature. A change has to occur
and be detected to drive a risk management decision by the
pilot. For instance, many pilots complete risk management
sheets prior to takeoff. These form a catalog of risks
that may be encountered that day. Each of these risks is
assigned a numerical value. If the total of these numerical
values exceeds a predetermined level, the flight is altered or
cancelled. Informal research shows that while these are useful
documents for teaching risk factors, they are almost never
used outside of formal training programs. The 5P concept is
an attempt to take the information contained in those sheets
and in the other available models and use it.
The 5P concept relies on the pilot to adopt a “scheduled”
review of the critical variables at points in the flight where
decisions are most likely to be effective. For instance, the
easiest point to cancel a flight due to bad weather is before the
pilot and passengers walk out the door and load the aircraft.
So the first decision point is preflight in the flight planning
room, where all the information is readily available to make
a sound decision, and where communication and Fixed
Base Operator (FBO) services are readily available to make
alternate travel plans.
The second easiest point in the flight to make a critical safety
decision is just prior to takeoff. Few pilots have ever had
to make an “emergency takeoff.” While the point of the 5P
check is to help the pilot fly, the correct application of the 5
P before takeoff is to assist in making a reasoned go/no-go
decision based on all the information available. That decision
will usually be to “go,” with certain restrictions and changes,
but may also be a “no-go.” The key idea is that these two
points in the process of flying are critical go/no-go points on
each and every flight.
The third place to review the 5 Ps is at the midpoint of the
flight. Often, pilots may wait until the Automated Terminal
information Service (ATIS) is in range to check weather, yet,
at this point in the flight, many good options have already
passed behind the aircraft and pilot. Additionally, fatigue

and low-altitude hypoxia serve to rob the pilot of much of
his or her energy by the end of a long and tiring flight day.
This leads to a transition from a decision-making mode to an
acceptance mode on the part of the pilot. If the flight is longer
than 2 hours, the 5 P check should be conducted hourly.
The last two decision points are just prior to descent into the
terminal area and just prior to the final approach fix, or if
VFR, just prior to entering the traffic pattern as preparations
for landing commence. Most pilots execute approaches with
the expectation that they will land out of the approach every
time. A healthier approach requires the pilot to assume that
changing conditions (the 5 Ps again) will cause the pilot to
divert or execute the missed approach on every approach.
This keeps the pilot alert to all manner of conditions that
may increase risk and threaten the safe conduct of the flight.
Diverting from cruise altitude saves fuel, allows unhurried
use of the autopilot and is less reactive in nature. Diverting
from the final approach fix, while more difficult, still allows
the pilot to plan and coordinate better, rather than executing
a futile missed approach. Let’s look at a detailed discussion
of each of the Five Ps.
The Plan
The “Plan” can also be called the mission or the task. It
contains the basic elements of cross-country planning,
weather, route, fuel, publications currency, etc. The “Plan”
should be reviewed and updated several times during the
course of the flight. A delayed takeoff due to maintenance,
fast moving weather, and a short notice TFR may all radically
alter the plan. The “plan” is not only about the flight plan,
but also all the events that surround the flight and allow the
pilot to accomplish the mission. The plan is always being
updated and modified and is especially responsive to changes
in the other four remaining Ps. If for no other reason, the 5 P
check reminds the pilot that the day’s flight plan is real life
and subject to change at any time.
Obviously, weather is a huge part of any plan. The addition
of datalink weather information gives the advanced avionics
pilot a real advantage in inclement weather, but only if the
pilot is trained to retrieve and evaluate the weather in real
time without sacrificing situational awareness. And of course,
weather information should drive a decision, even if that
decision is to continue on the current plan. Pilots of aircraft
without datalink weather should get updated weather in flight
through an FSS and/or Flight Watch.
The Plane
Both the “plan” and the “plane” are fairly familiar to most
pilots. The “plane” consists of the usual array of mechanical
and cosmetic issues that every aircraft pilot, owner, or
operator can identify. With the advent of advanced avionics,
the “plane” has expanded to include database currency,
automation status, and emergency backup systems that were
unknown a few years ago. Much has been written about
single pilot IFR flight, both with and without an autopilot.
While this is a personal decision, it is just that—a decision.
Low IFR in a non-autopilot equipped aircraft may depend
on several of the other Ps to be discussed. Pilot proficiency,
currency, and fatigue are among them.
The Pilot
Flying, especially when business transportation is involved,
can expose a pilot to risks such as high altitudes, long trips
requiring significant endurance, and challenging weather.
Advanced avionics, when installed, can expose a pilot to high
stresses because of the inherent additional capabilities which
are available. When dealing with pilot risk, it is always best
to consult the “IMSAFE” checklist (see page 2-6).
The combination of late nights, pilot fatigue, and the effects
of sustained flight above 5,000 feet may cause pilots to
become less discerning, less critical of information, less
decisive, and more compliant and accepting. Just as the most
critical portion of the flight approaches (for instance a night
instrument approach, in the weather, after a 4-hour flight),
the pilot’s guard is down the most. The 5 P process helps a
pilot recognize the physiological challenges that they may
face towards the end of the flight prior to takeoff and allows
them to update personal conditions as the flight progresses.
Once risks are identified, the pilot is in a better place to
make alternate plans that lessen the effect of these factors
and provide a safer solution.
The Passengers
One of the key differences between CRM and SRM is the
way passengers interact with the pilot. The pilot of a highly
capable single-engine aircraft maintains a much more personal
relationship with the passengers as he/she is positioned within
an arm’s reach of them throughout the flight.
The necessity of the passengers to make airline connections
or important business meetings in a timely manner enters
into this pilot’s decision-making loop. Consider a flight
to Dulles Airport in which and the passengers, both close
friends and business partners, need to get to Washington,
D.C. for an important meeting. The weather is VFR all the
way to southern Virginia, then turns to low IFR as the pilot
approaches Dulles. A pilot employing the 5 P approach
might consider reserving a rental car at an airport in northern
North Carolina or southern Virginia to coincide with a
refueling stop. Thus, the passengers have a way to get to
Washington, and the pilot has an out to avoid being pressured
into continuing the flight if the conditions do not improve.

Figure 2-10. Risk management processing can take place in any of three timeframes.
Strategic
Deliberate
Time-Critical
Purpose
Used in a complex operation (e.g.,
introduction of new equipment); involves
research, use of analysis tools, formal
testing, or long term tracking of risks.
Uses experience and brainstorming to identify
hazards, assess risks, and develop controls
for planning operations, review of standard
operating or training procedures, etc.
“On the fly” mental or verbal review using
the basic risk management process
during the execution phase of an activity.
Passengers can also be pilots. If no one is designated as pilot
in command (PIC) and unplanned circumstances arise, the
decision-making styles of several self-confident pilots may
come into conflict.
Pilots also need to understand that non-pilots may not
understand the level of risk involved in flight. There is an
element of risk in every flight. That is why SRM calls it risk
management, not risk elimination. While a pilot may feel
comfortable with the risk present in a night IFR flight, the
passengers may not. A pilot employing SRM should ensure
the passengers are involved in the decision-making and given
tasks and duties to keep them busy and involved. If, upon a
factual description of the risks present, the passengers decide
to buy an airline ticket or rent a car, then a good decision has
generally been made. This discussion also allows the pilot
to move past what he or she thinks the passengers want to
do and find out what they actually want to do. This removes
self-induced pressure from the pilot.
The Programming
The advanced avionics aircraft adds an entirely new
dimension to the way GA aircraft are flown. The electronic
instrument displays, GPS, and autopilot reduce pilot
workload and increase pilot situational awareness. While
programming and operation of these devices are fairly
simple and straightforward, unlike the analog instruments
they replace, they tend to capture the pilot’s attention and
hold it for long periods of time. To avoid this phenomenon,
the pilot should plan in advance when and where the
programming for approaches, route changes, and airport
information gathering should be accomplished, as well as
times it should not. Pilot familiarity with the equipment, the
route, the local ATC environment, and personal capabilities
vis-à-vis the automation should drive when, where, and how
the automation is programmed and used.
The pilot should also consider what his or her capabilities
are in response to last minute changes of the approach (and
the reprogramming required) and ability to make large-scale
changes (a reroute for instance) while hand flying the aircraft.
Since formats are not standardized, simply moving from one
manufacturer’s equipment to another should give the pilot
pause and require more conservative planning and decisions.
The SRM process is simple. At least five times before
and during the flight, the pilot should review and consider
the “Plan, the Plane, the Pilot, the Passengers, and the
Programming” and make the appropriate decision required
by the current situation. It is often said that failure to make
a decision is a decision. Under SRM and the 5 Ps, even the
decision to make no changes to the current plan is made
through a careful consideration of all the risk factors present.
Perceive, Process, Perform (3P) Model
The Perceive, Process, Perform (3P) model for ADM offers
a simple, practical, and systematic approach that can be used
during all phases of flight. To use it, the pilot will:
Perceive the given set of circumstances for a flight
Process by evaluating their impact on flight safety
Perform by implementing the best course of action
Use the Perceive, Process, Perform, and Evaluate method as
a continuous model for every aeronautical decision that you
make. Although human beings will inevitably make mistakes,
anything that you can do to recognize and minimize potential
threats to your safety will make you a better pilot.
Depending upon the nature of the activity and the time
available, risk management processing can take place in
any of three timeframes. [Figure 2-10] Most flight training
activities take place in the “time-critical” timeframe for
risk management. The six steps of risk management can be
combined into an easy-to-remember 3P model for practical
risk management: Perceive, Process, Perform with the PAVE,
CARE and TEAM checklists. Pilots can help perceive
hazards by using the PAVE checklist of: Pilot, Aircraft,
enVironment, and External pressures. They can process
hazards by using the CARE checklist of: Consequences,
Alternatives, Reality, External factors. Finally, pilots can
perform risk management by using the TEAM choice list
of: Transfer, Eliminate, Accept, or Mitigate.
PAVE Checklist: Identify Hazards and Personal
Minimums
In the first step, the goal is to develop situational awareness
by perceiving hazards, which are present events, objects, or
circumstances that could contribute to an undesired future
event. In this step, the pilot will systematically identify and

Gayle is a healthy and well-rested private pilot with
approximately 300 hours total flight time. Hazards include her
lack of overall and cross-country experience and the fact that
she has not flown at all in 2 months.
Pilot
Departure and destination airports have long runways.
Weather is the main hazard. Although it is VFR, it is a typical
summer day in the Mid-Atlantic region: hot (near 90 °F) hazy
(visibility 7 miles), and humid with a density altitude of 2,500
feet. Weather at the destination airport (located in the
mountains) is still IMC but forecast to improve to visual
meteorological conditions (VMC) prior to her arrival. En route
weather is VMC, but there is an AIRMET Sierra for pockets of
IMC over mountain ridges along the proposed route of flight.
EnVironment
Although it does not have a panel-mount GPS or weather
avoidance gear, the aircraft—a C182 Skylane with long-range
fuel tanks—is in good mechanical condition with no inoperative
equipment. The instrument panel is a standard “six-pack.”
External pressures
Gayle is making the trip to spend a weekend with relatives she
does not see very often. Her family is very excited and has
made a number of plans for the visit.
Pilots can perceive hazards by using the PAVE checklist:
Figure 2-11. A real-world example of how the 3P model guides decisions on a cross-country trip using the PAVE checklist.
list hazards associated with all aspects of the flight: Pilot,
Aircraft, enVironment, and External pressures, which makes
up the PAVE checklist. [Figure 2-11] For each element,
ask “what could hurt me, my passengers, or my aircraft?”
All four elements combine and interact to create a unique
situation for any flight. Pay special attention to the pilotaircraft combination, and consider whether the combined
“pilot-aircraft team” is capable of the mission you want to fly.
For example, you may be a very experienced and proficient
pilot, but your weather flying ability is still limited if you
are flying a 1970s-model aircraft with no weather avoidance
gear. On the other hand, you may have a new technically
advanced aircraft with moving map GPS, weather datalink,
and autopilot—but if you do not have much weather flying
experience or practice in using this kind of equipment, you
cannot rely on the airplane’s capability to compensate for
your own lack of experience.
CARE Checklist: Review Hazards and Evaluate Risks
In the second step, the goal is to process this information to
determine whether the identified hazards constitute risk, which
is defined as the future impact of a hazard that is not controlled
or eliminated. The degree of risk posed by a given hazard
can be measured in terms of exposure (number of people or
resources affected), severity (extent of possible loss), and
probability (the likelihood that a hazard will cause a loss)
