Aircraft Systems
Chapter 7
This chapter covers the primary systems found on most
aircraft. These include the engine, propeller, induction,
ignition, as well as the fuel, lubrication, cooling, electrical,
landing gear, and environmental control systems.
Powerplant
An aircraft engine, or powerplant, produces thrust to propel
an aircraft. Reciprocating engines and turboprop engines
work in combination with a propeller to produce thrust.
Turbojet and turbofan engines produce thrust by increasing
the velocity of air flowing through the engine. All of these
powerplants also drive the various systems that support the
operation of an aircraft.

Figure 7-1. Radial engine.
Opposed cylinders
Figure 7-2. Horizontally opposed engine.
Reciprocating Engines
Most small aircraft are designed with reciprocating
engines. The name is derived from the back-and-forth, or
reciprocating, movement of the pistons that produces the
mechanical energy necessary to accomplish work.

Driven by a revitalization of the general aviation (GA)
industry and advances in both material and engine design,
reciprocating engine technology has improved dramatically
over the past two decades. The integration of computerized
engine management systems has improved fuel efficiency,
decreased emissions, and reduced pilot workload.
Reciprocating engines operate on the basic principle of
converting chemical energy (fuel) into mechanical energy.
This conversion occurs within the cylinders of the engine
through the process of combustion. The two primary
reciprocating engine designs are the spark ignition and the
compression ignition. The spark ignition reciprocating engine
has served as the powerplant of choice for many years. In
an effort to reduce operating costs, simplify design, and
improve reliability, several engine manufacturers are turning
to compression ignition as a viable alternative. Often referred
to as jet fuel piston engines, compression ignition engines
have the added advantage of utilizing readily available and
lower cost diesel or jet fuel.
The main mechanical components of the spark ignition and
the compression ignition engine are essentially the same.
Both use cylindrical combustion chambers and pistons that
travel the length of the cylinders to convert linear motion
into the rotary motion of the crankshaft. The main difference
between spark ignition and compression ignition is the
process of igniting the fuel. Spark ignition engines use a
spark plug to ignite a pre-mixed fuel-air mixture. (Fuel-air
mixture is the ratio of the “weight” of fuel to the “weight”
of air in the mixture to be burned.) A compression ignition
engine first compresses the air in the cylinder, raising its
temperature to a degree necessary for automatic ignition
when fuel is injected into the cylinder.
These two engine designs can be further classified as:
1. 	 Cylinder arrangement with respect to the crankshaft—
radial, in-line, v-type, or opposed
2. 	 Operating cycle—two or four
3. 	 Method of cooling—liquid or air
Radial engines were widely used during World War II and
many are still in service today. With these engines, a row or
rows of cylinders are arranged in a circular pattern around
the crankcase. The main advantage of a radial engine is the
favorable power-to-weight ratio. [Figure 7-1]
In-line engines have a comparatively small frontal area, but
their power-to-weight ratios are relatively low. In addition,
the rearmost cylinders of an air-cooled, in-line engine
receive very little cooling air, so these engines are normally
limited to four or six cylinders. V-type engines provide
more horsepower than in-line engines and still retain a small
frontal area.
Continued improvements in engine design led to the
development of the horizontally-opposed engine, which
remains the most popular reciprocating engines used on
smaller aircraft. These engines always have an even number
of cylinders, since a cylinder on one side of the crankcase
“opposes” a cylinder on the other side. [Figure 7-2] The
majority of these engines are air cooled and usually are
mounted in a horizontal position when installed on fixed-wing
airplanes. Opposed-type engines have high power-to-weight
ratios because they have a comparatively small, lightweight
crankcase. In addition, the compact cylinder arrangement
reduces the engine’s frontal area and allows a streamlined
installation that minimizes aerodynamic drag.

Exhaust valve
Fuel injector
Piston
Forced air
2. Power stroke
1.  Intake/compression

and exhaust
Figure 7-3. Two-stroke compression ignition.
Exhaust valve
Intake valve
Spark plug
Piston
Crankshaft
Connecting rod
Crankcase
Cylinder
Figure 7-4. Main components of a spark ignition reciprocating
engine.
Depending on the engine manufacturer, all of these
arrangements can be designed to utilize spark or compression
ignition and operate on either a two- or four-stroke cycle.
In a two-stroke engine, the conversion of chemical energy
into mechanical energy occurs over a two-stroke operating
cycle. The intake, compression, power, and exhaust processes
occur in only two strokes of the piston rather than the more
common four strokes. Because a two-stroke engine has
a power stroke upon each revolution of the crankshaft, it
typically has higher power-to-weight ratio than a comparable
four-stroke engine. Due to the inherent inefficiency and
disproportionate emissions of the earliest designs, use of the
two-stroke engine has been limited in aviation.
Recent advances in material and engine design have
reduced many of the negative characteristics associated
with two-stroke engines. Modern two-stroke engines often
use conventional oil sumps, oil pumps, and full pressure
fed lubrication systems. The use of direct fuel injection
and pressurized air, characteristic of advanced compression
ignition engines, make two-stroke compression ignition
engines a viable alternative to the more common four-stroke
spark ignition designs. [Figure 7-3]
Spark ignition four-stroke engines remain the most common
design used in GA today. [Figure 7-4] The main parts of a
spark ignition reciprocating engine include the cylinders,
crankcase, and accessory housing. The intake/exhaust valves,
spark plugs, and pistons are located in the cylinders. The
crankshaft and connecting rods are located in the crankcase.
The magnetos are normally located on the engine accessory
housing.
In a four-stroke engine, the conversion of chemical energy into
mechanical energy occurs over a four-stroke operating cycle.
The intake, compression, power, and exhaust processes occur
in four separate strokes of the piston in the following order.
1. 	 The intake stroke begins as the piston starts its
downward travel. When this happens, the intake
valve opens and the fuel-air mixture is drawn into the
cylinder.
2. 	 The compression stroke begins when the intake valve
closes, and the piston starts moving back to the top of
the cylinder. This phase of the cycle is used to obtain
a much greater power output from the fuel-air mixture
once it is ignited.
3. 	 The power stroke begins when the fuel-air mixture is
ignited. This causes a tremendous pressure increase
in the cylinder and forces the piston downward away
from the cylinder head, creating the power that turns
the crankshaft.

1. Intake
2. Compression
3. Power
4. Exhaust
Exhaust valve
Intake valve
Spark plug
Piston
Crankshaft
Connecting rod
Figure 7-5. The arrows in this illustration indicate the direction of
motion of the crankshaft and piston during the four-stroke cycle.
4. 	 The exhaust stroke is used to purge the cylinder of
burned gases. It begins when the exhaust valve opens,
and the piston starts to move toward the cylinder head
once again.
Even when the engine is operated at a fairly low speed,
the four-stroke cycle takes place several hundred times
each minute. [Figure 7-5] In a four-cylinder engine, each
cylinder operates on a different stroke. Continuous rotation
of a crankshaft is maintained by the precise timing of the
power strokes in each cylinder. Continuous operation of the
engine depends on the simultaneous function of auxiliary
systems, including the induction, ignition, fuel, oil, cooling,
and exhaust systems.
The latest advance in aircraft reciprocating engines was
pioneered in the mid-1960s by Frank Thielert, who looked
to the automotive industry for answers on how to integrate
diesel technology into an aircraft engine. The advantage
of a diesel-fueled reciprocating engine lies in the physical
similarity of diesel and kerosene. Aircraft equipped with a
diesel piston engine runs on standard aviation fuel kerosene,
which provides more independence, higher reliability, lower
consumption, and operational cost saving.
In 1999, Thielert formed Thielert Aircraft Engines (TAE)
to design, develop, certify, and manufacture a brand-new
Jet-A-burning diesel cycle engine (also known as jet-fueled
piston engine) for the GA industry. By March 2001, the first
prototype engine became the first certified diesel engine
since World War II. TAE continues to design and develop
diesel cycle engines and other engine manufacturers, such as
Société de Motorisations Aéronautiques (SMA), now offer
jet-fueled piston engines as well. TAE engines can be found
on the Diamond DA40 single and the DA42 Twin Star; the
first diesel engine to be part of the type certificate of a new
original equipment manufacturer (OEM) aircraft.
These engines have also gained a toehold in the retrofit
market with a supplemental type certificate (STC) to reengine the Cessna 172 models and the Piper PA-28 family.
The jet-fueled piston engine’s technology has continued to
progress and a full authority digital engine control (FADEC,
discussed more fully later in the chapter) is standard on such
equipped aircraft, which minimizes complication of engine
control. By 2007, various jet-fueled piston aircraft had logged
well over 600,000 hours of service.
Propeller
The propeller is a rotating airfoil, subject to induced drag,
stalls, and other aerodynamic principles that apply to any
airfoil. It provides the necessary thrust to pull, or in some
cases push, the aircraft through the air. The engine power is
used to rotate the propeller, which in turn generates thrust
very similar to the manner in which a wing produces lift.
The amount of thrust produced depends on the shape of the
airfoil, the angle of attack (AOA) of the propeller blade, and
the revolutions per minute (rpm) of the engine. The propeller
itself is twisted so the blade angle changes from hub to tip.
The greatest angle of incidence, or the highest pitch, is at the
hub while the smallest angle of incidence or smallest pitch
is at the tip. [Figure 7-6]
The reason for the twist is to produce uniform lift from the
hub to the tip. As the blade rotates, there is a difference in
the actual speed of the various portions of the blade. The tip
of the blade travels faster than the part near the hub, because
the tip travels a greater distance than the hub in the same
length of time. [Figure 7-7] Changing the angle of incidence
(pitch) from the hub to the tip to correspond with the speed
produces uniform lift throughout the length of the blade. A
propeller blade designed with the same angle of incidence

60 in.
40 in.
20 in.
h

l
—
 sl

—

k

er
at
tr
el
is
ta
ce
—
er
at
—
k
ot

re
at
er
 tr
av
el
dis
ta
nc
—v
er
y
hi
gh
pe
ed
—
kn
ot

,

2,
rp

2,
0 r
pm

Figure 7-6. Changes in propeller blade angle from hub to tip.
Figure 7-7. Relationship of travel distance and speed of various
portions of propeller blade.
Figure 7-8. Engine rpm is indicated on the tachometer.
RPM
HUNDREDS
I5
I0
I5
I0
HOURS

AVOID
CONTINUOUS
OPERATION
BETWEEN 2250
AND 2350 RPM
I0
throughout its entire length would be inefficient because as
airspeed increases in flight, the portion near the hub would
have a negative AOA while the blade tip would be stalled.
Small aircraft are equipped with either one of two types of
propellers: fixed-pitch or adjustable-pitch.
Fixed-Pitch Propeller
A propeller with fixed blade angles is a fixed-pitch propeller.
The pitch of this propeller is set by the manufacturer and
cannot be changed. Since a fixed-pitch propeller achieves
the best efficiency only at a given combination of airspeed
and rpm, the pitch setting is ideal for neither cruise nor
climb. Thus, the aircraft suffers a bit in each performance
category. The fixed-pitch propeller is used when low weight,
simplicity, and low cost are needed.
There are two types of fixed-pitch propellers: climb and
cruise. Whether the airplane has a climb or cruise propeller
installed depends upon its intended use. The climb propeller
has a lower pitch, therefore less drag. Less drag results in
higher rpm and more horsepower capability, which increases
performance during takeoffs and climbs but decreases
performance during cruising flight.
The cruise propeller has a higher pitch, therefore more
drag. More drag results in lower rpm and less horsepower
capability, which decreases performance during takeoffs and
climbs but increases efficiency during cruising flight.
The propeller is usually mounted on a shaft, which may be
an extension of the engine crankshaft. In this case, the rpm
of the propeller would be the same as the crankshaft rpm. On
some engines, the propeller is mounted on a shaft geared to
the engine crankshaft. In this type, the rpm of the propeller
is different than that of the engine.
In a fixed-pitch propeller, the tachometer is the indicator of
engine power. [Figure 7-8] A tachometer is calibrated in
hundreds of rpm and gives a direct indication of the engine
and propeller rpm. The instrument is color coded with a green
arc denoting the maximum continuous operating rpm. Some
tachometers have additional markings to reflect engine and/or
propeller limitations. The manufacturer’s recommendations
should be used as a reference to clarify any misunderstanding
of tachometer markings.
The rpm is regulated by the throttle, which controls the fuelair flow to the engine. At a given altitude, the higher the
tachometer reading, the higher the power output of the engine.
When operating altitude increases, the tachometer may not
show correct power output of the engine. For example, 2,300
rpm at 5,000 feet produces less horsepower than 2,300 rpm
at sea level because power output depends on air density. Air
density decreases as altitude increases and a decrease in air

IN  Hg
ALg.
MANIFOLD
PRESS
Figure 7-9. Engine power output is indicated on the manifold
pressure gauge.
density (higher density altitude) decreases the power output
of the engine. As altitude changes, the position of the throttle
must be changed to maintain the same rpm. As altitude is
increased, the throttle must be opened further to indicate the
same rpm as at a lower altitude.
Adjustable-Pitch Propeller
The adjustable-pitch propeller was the forerunner of the
constant-speed propeller. It is a propeller with blades whose
pitch can be adjusted on the ground with the engine not
running, but which cannot be adjusted in flight. It is also
referred to as a ground adjustable propeller. By the 1930s,
pioneer aviation inventors were laying the ground work for
automatic pitch-change mechanisms, which is why the term
sometimes refers to modern constant-speed propellers that
are adjustable in flight.
The first adjustable-pitch propeller systems provided only two
pitch settings: low and high. Today, most adjustable-pitch
propeller systems are capable of a range of pitch settings.
A constant-speed propeller is a controllable-pitch propeller
whose pitch is automatically varied in flight by a governor
maintaining constant rpm despite varying air loads. It is the
most common type of adjustable-pitch propeller. The main
advantage of a constant-speed propeller is that it converts
a high percentage of brake horsepower (BHP) into thrust
horsepower (THP) over a wide range of rpm and airspeed
combinations. A constant-speed propeller is more efficient
than other propellers because it allows selection of the most
efficient engine rpm for the given conditions.
An aircraft with a constant-speed propeller has two controls:
the throttle and the propeller control. The throttle controls
power output, and the propeller control regulates engine
rpm. This regulates propeller rpm, which is registered on
the tachometer.
Once a specific rpm is selected, a governor automatically
adjusts the propeller blade angle as necessary to maintain
the selected rpm. For example, after setting the desired rpm
during cruising flight, an increase in airspeed or decrease in
propeller load causes the propeller blade angle to increase
as necessary to maintain the selected rpm. A reduction in
airspeed or increase in propeller load causes the propeller
blade angle to decrease.
The propeller’s constant-speed range, defined by the high
and low pitch stops, is the range of possible blade angles for
a constant-speed propeller. As long as the propeller blade
angle is within the constant-speed range and not against
either pitch stop, a constant engine rpm is maintained. If
the propeller blades contact a pitch stop, the engine rpm
will increase or decrease as appropriate, with changes in
airspeed and propeller load. For example, once a specific
rpm has been selected, if aircraft speed decreases enough to
rotate the propeller blades until they contact the low pitch
stop, any further decrease in airspeed will cause engine rpm
to decrease the same way as if a fixed-pitch propeller were
installed. The same holds true when an aircraft equipped with
a constant-speed propeller accelerates to a faster airspeed. As
the aircraft accelerates, the propeller blade angle increases to
maintain the selected rpm until the high pitch stop is reached.
Once this occurs, the blade angle cannot increase any further
and engine rpm increases.
On aircraft equipped with a constant-speed propeller, power
output is controlled by the throttle and indicated by a manifold
pressure gauge. The gauge measures the absolute pressure of
the fuel-air mixture inside the intake manifold and is more
correctly a measure of manifold absolute pressure (MAP). At
a constant rpm and altitude, the amount of power produced
is directly related to the fuel-air mixture being delivered to
the combustion chamber. As the throttle setting is increased,
more fuel and air flows to the engine and MAP increases.
When the engine is not running, the manifold pressure gauge
indicates ambient air pressure (i.e., 29.92 inches mercury
(29.92 "Hg)). When the engine is started, the manifold
pressure indication decreases to a value less than ambient
pressure (i.e., idle at 12 "Hg). Engine failure or power loss
is indicated on the manifold gauge as an increase in manifold
pressure to a value corresponding to the ambient air pressure
at the altitude where the failure occurred. [Figure 7-9]
The manifold pressure gauge is color coded to indicate the
engine’s operating range. The face of the manifold pressure
gauge contains a green arc to show the normal operating
range and a red radial line to indicate the upper limit of
manifold pressure.

For any given rpm, there is a manifold pressure that should
not be exceeded. If manifold pressure is excessive for a given
rpm, the pressure within the cylinders could be exceeded,
placing undue stress on the cylinders. If repeated too
frequently, this stress can weaken the cylinder components
and eventually cause engine failure.
A pilot can avoid conditions that overstress the cylinders
by being constantly aware of the rpm, especially when
increasing the manifold pressure. Consult the manufacturer’s
recommendations for power settings of a particular engine to
maintain the proper relationship between manifold pressure
and rpm.
When both manifold pressure and rpm need to be changed,
avoid engine overstress by making power adjustments in
the proper order:
When power settings are being decreased, reduce
manifold pressure before reducing rpm. If rpm is
reduced before manifold pressure, manifold pressure
automatically increases, possibly exceeding the
manufacturer’s tolerances.
When power settings are being increased, reverse the
order—increase rpm first, then manifold pressure.
To prevent damage to radial engines, minimize
operating time at maximum rpm and manifold
pressure, and avoid operation at maximum rpm and
low manifold pressure.
The engine and/or airframe manufacturer’s recommendations
should be followed to prevent severe wear, fatigue, and
damage to high-performance reciprocating engines.
Propeller Overspeed in Piston Engine Aircraft
On March 17, 2010, the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) issued Special Airworthiness Information Bulletin
(SAIB) CE-10-21. The subject was Propellers/Propulsers;
Propeller Overspeed in Piston Engine Aircraft to alert
operators, pilots, and aircraft manufacturers of concerns
for an optimum response to a propeller overspeed in piston
engine aircraft with variable pitch propellers. Although a
SAIB is not regulatory in nature, the FAA recommends that
the information be read and taken into consideration for the
safety of flight.
The document explains that a single-engine aircraft
experienced a propeller overspeed during cruise flight at
7,000 feet. The pilot reported that the application of throttle
resulted in a propeller overspeed with no appreciable thrust.
The pilot attempted to glide to a nearby airport and established
the “best glide” speed of 110 knots, as published in the Pilot’s
Operating Handbook (POH), but was unable to reach the
airport and was forced to conduct an off-field landing.
It was further explained that a determination was made that the
propeller experienced a failure causing the blade pitch change
mechanism to move to the low pitch stop position. This caused
the propeller to operate as a fixed-pitch propeller such that it
changes rpm with changes in power and airspeed. The low
pitch setting allows for maximum power during takeoff but
can result in a propeller overspeed at a higher airspeed.
A performance evaluation of the flight condition was
performed for the particular aircraft model involved in this
incident. This evaluation indicated that an airspeed lower
than the best glide speed would have resulted in increased
thrust enabling the pilot to maintain level flight. There are
numerous variables in aircraft, engines, and propellers
that affect aircraft performance. For some aircraft models,
the published best glide speed may not be low enough to
generate adequate thrust for a given propeller installation in
this situation (propeller blades at low pitch stop position).
The operators of aircraft with variable pitch propellers should
be aware that in certain instances of propeller overspeed, the
airspeed necessary to maintain level flight may be different
than the speed associated with engine-out best glide speed.
The appropriate emergency procedures should be followed to
mitigate the emergency situation in the event of a propeller
overspeed; however, pilots should be aware that some
reduction in airspeed may result in the ability for continued
safe flight and landing. The determination of an airspeed that
is more suitable than engine-out best glide speed should only
be conducted at a safe altitude when the pilot has time to
determine an alternative course of action other than landing
immediately.
Induction Systems
The induction system brings in air from the outside, mixes
it with fuel, and delivers the fuel-air mixture to the cylinder
where combustion occurs. Outside air enters the induction
system through an intake port on the front of the engine
cowling. This port normally contains an air filter that inhibits
the entry of dust and other foreign objects. Since the filter
may occasionally become clogged, an alternate source of
air must be available. Usually, the alternate air comes from
inside the engine cowling, where it bypasses a clogged air
filter. Some alternate air sources function automatically,
while others operate manually.

Fuel
Fuel level is maintained
by a float-type device.
Float chamber
Fuel is received into
the carburetor through
the fuel inlet.
Fuel inlet
The mixture needle
controls fuel to the
discharge nozzle.
Mixture needle position
can be adjusted using
the mixture control.
Mixture needle
Air enters the carburetor
through the air inlet.
Air inlet
The blend of fuel and
air is routed to the
combustion chambers
to be burned.
Fuel-air mixture
The flow of the fuel-air
mixture is controlled by
the throttle valve. The
throttle valve is adjusted
from the flight deck by
the throttle.
Throttle valve
Fuel is forced through
the discharge nozzle
into the venturi by
greater atmospheric
pressure in the float
chamber.
Discharge nozzle
The shape of the venturi
creates an area of low
pressure.
Venturi
The air bleed allows air to be mixed
with fuel being drawn out of the
discharge nozzle to decrease fuel
density and promote fuel vaporization.
Air bleed
Figure 7-10. Float-type carburetor.
Two types of induction systems are commonly used in small
aircraft engines:
The carburetor system mixes the fuel and air in
the carburetor before this mixture enters the intake
manifold.
The fuel injection system mixes the fuel and air
immediately before entry into each cylinder or injects
fuel directly into each cylinder.
Carburetor Systems
Aircraft carburetors are separated into two categories: floattype carburetors and pressure-type carburetors. Float-type
carburetors, complete with idling, accelerating, mixture
control, idle cutoff, and power enrichment systems, are the
most common of the two carburetor types. Pressure-type
carburetors are usually not found on small aircraft. The basic
difference between a float-type and a pressure-type carburetor
is the delivery of fuel. The pressure-type carburetor delivers
fuel under pressure by a fuel pump.
In the operation of the float-type carburetor system, the
outside air first flows through an air filter, usually located
at an air intake in the front part of the engine cowling. This
filtered air flows into the carburetor and through a venturi, a
narrow throat in the carburetor. When the air flows through
the venturi, a low-pressure area is created that forces the
fuel to flow through a main fuel jet located at the throat. The
fuel then flows into the airstream where it is mixed with the
flowing air. [Figure 7-10]
The fuel-air mixture is then drawn through the intake
manifold and into the combustion chambers where it is
ignited. The float-type carburetor acquires its name from a
float that rests on fuel within the float chamber. A needle
attached to the float opens and closes an opening at the
bottom of the carburetor bowl. This meters the amount of
fuel entering into the carburetor, depending upon the position
of the float, which is controlled by the level of fuel in the
float chamber. When the level of the fuel forces the float
to rise, the needle valve closes the fuel opening and shuts
off the fuel flow to the carburetor. The needle valve opens
again when the engine requires additional fuel. The flow of
the fuel-air mixture to the combustion chambers is regulated
by the throttle valve, which is controlled by the throttle in
the flight deck.
The float-type carburetor has several distinct disadvantages.
First, they do not function well during abrupt maneuvers.
Secondly, the discharge of fuel at low pressure leads to
incomplete vaporization and difficulty in discharging
fuel into some types of supercharged systems. The chief
disadvantage of the float-type carburetor, however, is its
icing tendency. Since the float-type carburetor must discharge

Incoming air
Venturi
Ice
To engine
Fuel-air mixture
Ice
Ice
Figure 7-11. The formation of carburetor ice may reduce or block
fuel-air flow to the engine.
Carburetor Icing
As mentioned earlier, one disadvantage of the float-type
carburetor is its icing tendency. Carburetor ice occurs due
to the effect of fuel vaporization and the decrease in air
pressure in the venturi, which causes a sharp temperature
drop in the carburetor. If water vapor in the air condenses
when the carburetor temperature is at or below freezing, ice
may form on internal surfaces of the carburetor, including
the throttle valve. [Figure 7-11]
The reduced air pressure, as well as the vaporization of fuel,
contributes to the temperature decrease in the carburetor. Ice
generally forms in the vicinity of the throttle valve and in the
venturi throat. This restricts the flow of the fuel-air mixture
and reduces power. If enough ice builds up, the engine may
cease to operate. Carburetor ice is most likely to occur when
temperatures are below 70 degrees Fahrenheit (°F) or 21
degrees Celsius (°C) and the relative humidity is above 80
percent. Due to the sudden cooling that takes place in the
carburetor, icing can occur even in outside air temperatures
as high as 100 °F (38 °C) and humidity as low as 50 percent.
This temperature drop can be as much as 60 to 70 absolute
(versus relative) Fahrenheit degrees (70 x 100/180 = 38.89
fuel at a point of low pressure, the discharge nozzle must be
located at the venturi throat, and the throttle valve must be
on the engine side of the discharge nozzle. This means that
the drop in temperature due to fuel vaporization takes place
within the venturi. As a result, ice readily forms in the venturi
and on the throttle valve.
A pressure-type carburetor discharges fuel into the airstream
at a pressure well above atmospheric pressure. This results
in better vaporization and permits the discharge of fuel into
the airstream on the engine side of the throttle valve. With the
discharge nozzle in this position fuel vaporization takes place
after the air has passed through the throttle valve and at a point
where the drop in temperature is offset by heat from the engine.
Thus, the danger of fuel vaporization icing is practically
eliminated. The effects of rapid maneuvers and rough air on
the pressure-type carburetors are negligible, since their fuel
chambers remain filled under all operating conditions.
Mixture Control
Carburetors are normally calibrated at sea-level air pressure
where the correct fuel-air mixture ratio is established with the
mixture control set in the FULL RICH position. However, as
altitude increases, the density of air entering the carburetor
decreases, while the density of the fuel remains the same. This
creates a progressively richer mixture that can result in engine
roughness and an appreciable loss of power. The roughness
normally is due to spark plug fouling from excessive carbon
buildup on the plugs. Carbon buildup occurs because the
rich mixture lowers the temperature inside the cylinder,
inhibiting complete combustion of the fuel. This condition
may occur during the runup prior to takeoff at high-elevation
airports and during climbs or cruise flight at high altitudes.
To maintain the correct fuel-air mixture, the mixture must
be leaned using the mixture control. Leaning the mixture
decreases fuel flow, which compensates for the decreased
air density at high altitude.
During a descent from high altitude, the fuel-air mixture
must be enriched, or it may become too lean. An overly lean
mixture causes detonation, which may result in rough engine
operation, overheating, and/or a loss of power. The best way
to maintain the proper fuel-air mixture is to monitor the
engine temperature and enrich the mixture as needed. Proper
mixture control and better fuel economy for fuel-injected
engines can be achieved by using an exhaust gas temperature
(EGT) gauge. Since the process of adjusting the mixture can
vary from one aircraft to another, it is important to refer to
the airplane flight manual (AFM) or the POH to determine
the specific procedures for a given aircraft.

Relative humidity
Outside air temperature
100%
50%
80%
60%
70%
90%
20°F/-7°C 32°F/0°C
70°F/21°C
100°F/38°C
High carburetor
icing potential
Carburetor icing possible
Figure 7-12. Although carburetor ice is most likely to form when
the temperature and humidity are in ranges indicated by this chart,
carburetor icing is possible under conditions not depicted.
presence. If detected, full carburetor heat should be applied
immediately, and it should be left in the ON position until
the pilot is certain that all the ice has been removed. If ice
is present, applying partial heat or leaving heat on for an
insufficient time might aggravate the situation. In extreme
cases of carburetor icing, even after the ice has been removed,
full carburetor heat should be used to prevent further ice
formation. If installed, a carburetor temperature gauge is
useful in determining when to use carburetor heat.
Whenever the throttle is closed during flight, the engine cools
rapidly and vaporization of the fuel is less complete than if
the engine is warm. Also, in this condition, the engine is more
susceptible to carburetor icing. If carburetor icing conditions
are suspected and closed-throttle operation anticipated, adjust
the carburetor heat to the full ON position before closing the
throttle and leave it on during the closed-throttle operation.
The heat aids in vaporizing the fuel and helps prevent the
formation of carburetor ice. Periodically, open the throttle
smoothly for a few seconds to keep the engine warm;
otherwise, the carburetor heater may not provide enough
heat to prevent icing.
The use of carburetor heat causes a decrease in engine
power, sometimes up to 15 percent, because the heated
air is less dense than the outside air that had been entering
the engine. This enriches the mixture. When ice is present
in an aircraft with a fixed-pitch propeller and carburetor
heat is being used, there is a decrease in rpm, followed by
a gradual increase in rpm as the ice melts. The engine also
should run more smoothly after the ice has been removed.
If ice is not present, the rpm decreases and then remains
constant. When carburetor heat is used on an aircraft with a
constant-speed propeller and ice is present, a decrease in the
manifold pressure is noticed, followed by a gradual increase.
If carburetor icing is not present, the gradual increase in
manifold pressure is not apparent until the carburetor heat
is turned off.
It is imperative for a pilot to recognize carburetor ice when it
forms during flight to prevent a loss in power, altitude, and/or
airspeed. These symptoms may sometimes be accompanied
by vibration or engine roughness. Once a power loss is
noticed, immediate action should be taken to eliminate ice
already formed in the carburetor and to prevent further ice
formation. This is accomplished by applying full carburetor
heat, which will further reduce power and may cause engine
roughness as melted ice goes through the engine. These
symptoms may last from 30 seconds to several minutes,
depending on the severity of the icing. During this period, the
pilot must resist the temptation to decrease the carburetor heat
usage. Carburetor heat must remain in the full-hot position
until normal power returns.
Celsius degrees) (Remember there are 180 Fahrenheit degrees
from freezing to boiling versus 100 degrees for the Celsius
scale.) Therefore, an outside air temperature of 100 F (38 C),
a temperature drop of an absolute 70 F degrees (38.89 Celsius
degrees) results in an air temperature in the carburetor of 30
F (-1 C). [Figure 7-12]
The first indication of carburetor icing in an aircraft with
a fixed-pitch propeller is a decrease in engine rpm, which
may be followed by engine roughness. In an aircraft with a
constant-speed propeller, carburetor icing is usually indicated
by a decrease in manifold pressure, but no reduction in rpm.
Propeller pitch is automatically adjusted to compensate for
loss of power. Thus, a constant rpm is maintained. Although
carburetor ice can occur during any phase of flight, it is
particularly dangerous when using reduced power during a
descent. Under certain conditions, carburetor ice could build
unnoticed until power is added. To combat the effects of
carburetor ice, engines with float-type carburetors employ a
carburetor heat system.
Carburetor Heat
Carburetor heat is an anti-icing system that preheats the air
before it reaches the carburetor and is intended to keep the
fuel-air mixture above freezing to prevent the formation of
carburetor ice. Carburetor heat can be used to melt ice that has
already formed in the carburetor if the accumulation is not too
great, but using carburetor heat as a preventative measure is
the better option. Additionally, carburetor heat may be used
as an alternate air source if the intake filter clogs, such as in
sudden or unexpected airframe icing conditions. The carburetor
heat should be checked during the engine runup. When using
carburetor heat, follow the manufacturer’s recommendations.
When conditions are conducive to carburetor icing during
flight, periodic checks should be made to detect its

Fuel tank
Auxiliary fuel pump
Engine-driven fuel pump
Fuel-air control unit
Fuel manifold valve
Fuel lines
Figure 7-13. Fuel injection system.
Since the use of carburetor heat tends to reduce the output
of the engine and to increase the operating temperature,
carburetor heat should not be used when full power is required
(as during takeoff) or during normal engine operation, except
to check for the presence of, or to remove, carburetor ice.
Carburetor Air Temperature Gauge
Some aircraft are equipped with a carburetor air temperature
gauge, which is useful in detecting potential icing conditions.
Usually, the face of the gauge is calibrated in degrees Celsius
with a yellow arc indicating the carburetor air temperatures
where icing may occur. This yellow arc typically ranges
between –15 °C and +5 °C (5 °F and 41 °F). If the air
temperature and moisture content of the air are such that
carburetor icing is improbable, the engine can be operated
with the indicator in the yellow range with no adverse effects.
If the atmospheric conditions are conducive to carburetor
icing, the indicator must be kept outside the yellow arc by
application of carburetor heat.
Certain carburetor air temperature gauges have a red radial
that indicates the maximum permissible carburetor inlet air
temperature recommended by the engine manufacturer. If
present, a green arc indicates the normal operating range.
Outside Air Temperature Gauge
Most aircraft are also equipped with an outside air
temperature (OAT) gauge calibrated in both degrees
Celsius and Fahrenheit. It provides the outside or ambient
air temperature for calculating true airspeed and is useful in
detecting potential icing conditions.
Fuel Injection Systems
In a fuel injection system, the fuel is injected directly into
the cylinders, or just ahead of the intake valve. The air
intake for the fuel injection system is similar to that used
in a carburetor system, with an alternate air source located
within the engine cowling. This source is used if the external
air source is obstructed. The alternate air source is usually
operated automatically, with a backup manual system that
can be used if the automatic feature malfunctions.
A fuel injection system usually incorporates six basic
components: an engine-driven fuel pump, a fuel-air control
unit, a fuel manifold (fuel distributor), discharge nozzles,
an auxiliary fuel pump, and fuel pressure/flow indicators.
[Figure 7-13]
The auxiliary fuel pump provides fuel under pressure to the
fuel-air control unit for engine starting and/or emergency
use. After starting, the engine-driven fuel pump provides fuel
under pressure from the fuel tank to the fuel-air control unit.
This control unit, which essentially replaces the carburetor,
meters fuel based on the mixture control setting and sends it
to the fuel manifold valve at a rate controlled by the throttle.

After reaching the fuel manifold valve, the fuel is distributed
to the individual fuel discharge nozzles. The discharge
nozzles, which are located in each cylinder head, inject the
fuel-air mixture directly into each cylinder intake port.
A fuel injection system is considered to be less susceptible
to icing than a carburetor system, but impact icing on the air
intake is a possibility in either system. Impact icing occurs
when ice forms on the exterior of the aircraft and blocks
openings, such as the air intake for the injection system.

The following are advantages of using fuel injection:
Reduction in evaporative icing
Better fuel flow
Faster throttle response
Precise control of mixture
Better fuel distribution
Easier cold weather starts
The following are disadvantages of using fuel injection:
Difficulty in starting a hot engine
Vapor locks during ground operations on hot days
Problems associated with restarting an engine that
quits because of fuel starvation
Superchargers and Turbosuperchargers
To increase an engine’s horsepower, manufacturers have
developed forced induction systems called supercharger
and turbosupercharger systems. They both compress the
intake air to increase its density. The key difference lies in
the power supply. A supercharger relies on an engine-driven
air pump or compressor, while a turbocharger gets its power
from the exhaust stream that runs through a turbine, which in
turn spins the compressor. Aircraft with these systems have
a manifold pressure gauge, which displays MAP within the
engine’s intake manifold.

On a standard day at sea level with the engine shut
down, the manifold pressure gauge indicates the ambient
absolute air pressure of 29.92 "Hg. Because atmospheric
pressure decreases approximately 1 "Hg per 1,000 feet of
altitude increase, the manifold pressure gauge indicates
approximately 24.92 "Hg at an airport that is 5,000 feet above
sea level with standard day conditions.
As a normally aspirated aircraft climbs, it eventually reaches
an altitude where the MAP is insufficient for a normal climb.
This altitude limit is known as the aircraft’s service ceiling,
and it is directly affected by the engine’s ability to produce
power. If the induction air entering the engine is pressurized,
or boosted, by either a supercharger or a turbosupercharger,
the aircraft’s service ceiling can be increased. With these
systems, an aircraft can fly at higher altitudes with the
advantage of higher true airspeeds and the increased ability
to circumnavigate adverse weather.
Superchargers
A supercharger is an engine-driven air pump or compressor
that provides compressed air to the engine to provide
additional pressure to the induction air so that the engine can
produce additional power. It increases manifold pressure and
forces the fuel-air mixture into the cylinders. Higher manifold
pressure increases the density of the fuel-air mixture and
increases the power an engine can produce. With a normally
aspirated engine, it is not possible to have manifold pressure
higher than the existing atmospheric pressure. A supercharger
is capable of boosting manifold pressure above 30 "Hg.
For example, at 8,000 feet, a typical engine may be able to
produce 75 percent of the power it could produce at mean
sea level (MSL) because the air is less dense at the higher
altitude. The supercharger compresses the air to a higher
density allowing a supercharged engine to produce the same
manifold pressure at higher altitudes as it could produce
at sea level. Thus, an engine at 8,000 feet MSL could still
produce 25 "Hg of manifold pressure whereas, without a
supercharger, it could only produce 22 "Hg. Superchargers
are especially valuable at high altitudes (such as 18,000 feet)
where the air density is 50 percent that of sea level. The use
of a supercharger in many cases will supply air to the engine
at the same density it did at sea level.
The components in a supercharged induction system are similar
to those in a normally aspirated system, with the addition of
a supercharger between the fuel metering device and intake
manifold. A supercharger is driven by the engine through a
gear train at one speed, two speeds, or variable speeds. In
addition, superchargers can have one or more stages. Each
stage also provides an increase in pressure and superchargers
may be classified as single stage, two stage, or multistage,
depending on the number of times compression occurs.
An early version of a single-stage, single-speed supercharger
may be referred to as a sea-level supercharger. An engine
equipped with this type of supercharger is called a sea-level
engine. With this type of supercharger, a single gear-driven
impeller is used to increase the power produced by an engine
at all altitudes. The drawback with this type of supercharger is
a decrease in engine power output with an increase in altitude.
Single-stage, single-speed superchargers are found on many
high-powered radial engines and use an air intake that faces
forward so the induction system can take full advantage of

Figure 7-14. Power output of normally aspirated engine compared
to a single-stage, two-speed supercharged engine.
Brake horsepower
Density altitude
Two-speed supercharged engine
High blower
Low blower

Normall
y aspirated eng
ine
the ram air. Intake air passes through ducts to a carburetor,
where fuel is metered in proportion to the airflow. The
fuel-air charge is then ducted to the supercharger, or blower
impeller, which accelerates the fuel-air mixture outward.
Once accelerated, the fuel-air mixture passes through a
diffuser, where air velocity is traded for pressure energy.
After compression, the resulting high pressure fuel-air
mixture is directed to the cylinders.
Some of the large radial engines developed during World
War II have a single-stage, two-speed supercharger. With
this type of supercharger, a single impeller may be operated
at two speeds. The low impeller speed is often referred to
as the low blower setting, while the high impeller speed is
called the high blower setting. On engines equipped with a
two-speed supercharger, a lever or switch in the flight deck
activates an oil-operated clutch that switches from one speed
to the other.
Under normal operations, takeoff is made with the
supercharger in the low blower position. In this mode, the
engine performs as a ground-boosted engine, and the power
output decreases as the aircraft gains altitude. However, once
the aircraft reaches a specified altitude, a power reduction is
made, and the supercharger control is switched to the high
blower position. The throttle is then reset to the desired
manifold pressure. An engine equipped with this type of
supercharger is called an altitude engine. [Figure 7-14]
Turbosuperchargers
The most efficient method of increasing horsepower in an
engine is by using a turbosupercharger or turbocharger.
Installed on an engine, this booster uses the engine’s exhaust
gases to drive an air compressor to increase the pressure of
the air going into the engine through the carburetor or fuel
injection system to boost power at higher altitude.
The major disadvantage of the gear-driven supercharger––use
of a large amount of the engine’s power output for the amount
of power increase produced––is avoided with a turbocharger
because turbochargers are powered by an engine’s exhaust
gases. This means a turbocharger recovers energy from hot
exhaust gases that would otherwise be lost.
A second advantage of turbochargers over superchargers is
the ability to maintain control over an engine’s rated sealevel horsepower from sea level up to the engine’s critical
altitude. Critical altitude is the maximum altitude at which
a turbocharged engine can produce its rated horsepower.
Above the critical altitude, power output begins to decrease
like it does for a normally aspirated engine.
Turbochargers increase the pressure of the engine’s induction
air, which allows the engine to develop sea level or greater
horsepower at higher altitudes. A turbocharger is comprised
of two main elements: a compressor and turbine. The
compressor section houses an impeller that turns at a high rate
of speed. As induction air is drawn across the impeller blades,
the impeller accelerates the air, allowing a large volume of
air to be drawn into the compressor housing. The impeller’s
action subsequently produces high-pressure, high-density
air that is delivered to the engine. To turn the impeller, the
engine’s exhaust gases are used to drive a turbine wheel
that is mounted on the opposite end of the impeller’s drive
shaft. By directing different amounts of exhaust gases to flow
over the turbine, more energy can be extracted, causing the
impeller to deliver more compressed air to the engine. The
waste gate, essentially an adjustable butterfly valve installed
in the exhaust system, is used to vary the mass of exhaust gas
flowing into the turbine. When closed, most of the exhaust
gases from the engine are forced to flow through the turbine.
When open, the exhaust gases are allowed to bypass the
turbine by flowing directly out through the engine’s exhaust
pipe. [Figure 7-15]
Since the temperature of a gas rises when it is compressed,
turbocharging causes the temperature of the induction air to
increase. To reduce this temperature and lower the risk of
detonation, many turbocharged engines use an intercooler.
This small heat exchanger uses outside air to cool the hot
compressed air before it enters the fuel metering device.

Exhaust gas discharge
Pressurized air from the
turbocharger is supplied
to the cylinders.
Intake manifold
Intake air is ducted to the
turbocharger where it is
compressed.
Air intake
This controls the amount
of exhaust through the
turbine. Waste gate
position is actuated by
engine oil pressure.
Waste gas
The turbocharger incorporates a turbine,
which is driven by exhaust gases and a compressor that pressurizes
the incoming air.
Turbocharger
This regulates airflow
to the engine.
Throttle body
Exhaust gas is ducted
through the exhaust manifold and is used to turn
the turbine which drives
the compressor.
Exhaust manifold
Figure 7-15. Turbocharger components.
System Operation
On most modern turbocharged engines, the position of
the waste gate is governed by a pressure-sensing control
mechanism coupled to an actuator. Engine oil directed into
or away from this actuator moves the waste gate position.
On these systems, the actuator is automatically positioned to
produce the desired MAP simply by changing the position
of the throttle control.
Other turbocharging system designs use a separate manual
control to position the waste gate. With manual control,
the manifold pressure gauge must be closely monitored to
determine when the desired MAP has been achieved. Manual
systems are often found on aircraft that have been modified
with aftermarket turbocharging systems. These systems
require special operating considerations. For example, if the
waste gate is left closed after descending from a high altitude,
it is possible to produce a manifold pressure that exceeds the
engine’s limitations. This condition, called an overboost,
may produce severe detonation because of the leaning effect
resulting from increased air density during descent.
Although an automatic waste gate system is less likely to
experience an overboost condition, it can still occur. If takeoff
power is applied while the engine oil temperature is below its
normal operating range, the cold oil may not flow out of the
waste gate actuator quickly enough to prevent an overboost.
To help prevent overboosting, advance the throttle cautiously
to prevent exceeding the maximum manifold pressure limits.
A pilot flying an aircraft with a turbocharger should be aware
of system limitations. For example, a turbocharger turbine
and impeller can operate at rotational speeds in excess of
80,000 rpm while at extremely high temperatures. To achieve
high rotational speed, the bearings within the system must be
constantly supplied with engine oil to reduce the frictional
forces and high temperature. To obtain adequate lubrication,
the oil temperature should be in the normal operating range
before high throttle settings are applied. In addition, allow
the turbocharger to cool and the turbine to slow down before
shutting the engine down. Otherwise, the oil remaining in
the bearing housing will boil, causing hard carbon deposits
to form on the bearings and shaft. These deposits rapidly
deteriorate the turbocharger’s efficiency and service life. For
further limitations, refer to the AFM/POH.
High Altitude Performance
As an aircraft equipped with a turbocharging system climbs,
the waste gate is gradually closed to maintain the maximum
allowable manifold pressure. At some point, the waste gate
is fully closed and further increases in altitude cause the
manifold pressure to decrease. This is the critical altitude,

Upper magneto wires
Lower magneto wires
Upper spark plugs
Lower spark plugs
Right magneto
Left magneto
Figure 7-16. Ignition system components.
which is established by the aircraft or engine manufacturer.
When evaluating the performance of the turbocharging
system, be aware that if the manifold pressure begins
decreasing before the specified critical altitude, the engine
and turbocharging system should be inspected by a qualified
aviation maintenance technician (AMT) to verify that the
system is operating properly.
Ignition System
In a spark ignition engine, the ignition system provides a
spark that ignites the fuel-air mixture in the cylinders and is
made up of magnetos, spark plugs, high-tension leads, and
an ignition switch. [Figure 7-16]
A magneto uses a permanent magnet to generate an electrical
current completely independent of the aircraft’s electrical
system. The magneto generates sufficiently high voltage
to jump a spark across the spark plug gap in each cylinder.
The system begins to fire when the starter is engaged and the
crankshaft begins to turn. It continues to operate whenever
the crankshaft is rotating.
Most standard certificated aircraft incorporate a dual ignition
system with two individual magnetos, separate sets of wires,
and spark plugs to increase reliability of the ignition system.
Each magneto operates independently to fire one of the two
spark plugs in each cylinder. The firing of two spark plugs
improves combustion of the fuel-air mixture and results in a
slightly higher power output. If one of the magnetos fails, the
other is unaffected. The engine continues to operate normally,
although a slight decrease in engine power can be expected.
The same is true if one of the two spark plugs in a cylinder fails.
The operation of the magneto is controlled in the flight deck
by the ignition switch. The switch has five positions:
1. 	 OFF
2. 	 R (right)
3. 	 L (left)
4. 	 BOTH
5. 	 START
With RIGHT or LEFT selected, only the associated magneto
is activated. The system operates on both magnetos when
BOTH is selected.
A malfunctioning ignition system can be identified during
the pretakeoff check by observing the decrease in rpm that
occurs when the ignition switch is first moved from BOTH
to RIGHT and then from BOTH to LEFT. A small decrease
in engine rpm is normal during this check. The permissible
decrease is listed in the AFM or POH. If the engine stops
running when switched to one magneto or if the rpm drop
exceeds the allowable limit, do not fly the aircraft until
the problem is corrected. The cause could be fouled plugs,

Figure 7-17. Wet-sump oil system.
Engine
and
Accessory
Bearings
I50
I00
°F
II5
I00
OIL
Oil cooler and filter
Oil pressure relief valve
Oil filler cap and dipstick
High pressure oil screen
Oil pump
Low pressure oil screen
Oil sump
Pressure oil from
oil pump
Sump oil and return
oil from relief valve
broken or shorted wires between the magneto and the plugs,
or improperly timed firing of the plugs. It should be noted
that “no drop” in rpm is not normal, and in that instance, the
aircraft should not be flown.
Following engine shutdown, turn the ignition switch to the
OFF position. Even with the battery and master switches
OFF, the engine can fire and turn over if the ignition switch
is left ON and the propeller is moved because the magneto
requires no outside source of electrical power. Be aware of
the potential for serious injury in this situation.
Even with the ignition switch in the OFF position, if
the ground wire between the magneto and the ignition
switch becomes disconnected or broken, the engine could
accidentally start if the propeller is moved with residual fuel
in the cylinder. If this occurs, the only way to stop the engine
is to move the mixture lever to the idle cutoff position, then
have the system checked by a qualified AMT.
Oil Systems
The engine oil system performs several important functions:
Lubrication of the engine’s moving parts
Cooling of the engine by reducing friction
Removing heat from the cylinders
Providing a seal between the cylinder walls and pistons
Carrying away contaminants
Reciprocating engines use either a wet-sump or a dry-sump
oil system. In a wet-sump system, the oil is located in a sump
that is an integral part of the engine. In a dry-sump system,
the oil is contained in a separate tank and circulated through
the engine by pumps. [Figure 7-17]
The main component of a wet-sump system is the oil pump,
which draws oil from the sump and routes it to the engine. After
the oil passes through the engine, it returns to the sump. In
some engines, additional lubrication is supplied by the rotating
crankshaft, which splashes oil onto portions of the engine.
An oil pump also supplies oil pressure in a dry-sump
system, but the source of the oil is located external to the
engine in a separate oil tank. After oil is routed through
the engine, it is pumped from the various locations in the
engine back to the oil tank by scavenge pumps. Dry-sump
systems allow for a greater volume of oil to be supplied to
the engine, which makes them more suitable for very large
reciprocating engines.
The oil pressure gauge provides a direct indication of the oil
system operation. It ensures the pressure in pounds per square
inch (psi) of the oil supplied to the engine. Green indicates
the normal operating range, while red indicates the minimum
and maximum pressures. There should be an indication of
oil pressure during engine start. Refer to the AFM/POH for
manufacturer limitations.

Figure 7-19. Outside air aids in cooling the engine.
Fixed cowl opening
Baffle
Baffle
Cylinders
Air inlet
Figure 7-18. Always check the engine oil level during the preflight
inspection.
The oil temperature gauge measures the temperature of oil.
A green area shows the normal operating range, and the red
line indicates the maximum allowable temperature. Unlike
oil pressure, changes in oil temperature occur more slowly.
This is particularly noticeable after starting a cold engine,
when it may take several minutes or longer for the gauge to
show any increase in oil temperature.
Check oil temperature periodically during flight especially
when operating in high or low ambient air temperature.
High oil temperature indications may signal a plugged oil
line, a low oil quantity, a blocked oil cooler, or a defective
temperature gauge. Low oil temperature indications may
signal improper oil viscosity during cold weather operations.
The oil filler cap and dipstick (for measuring the oil quantity)
are usually accessible through a panel in the engine cowling. If
the quantity does not meet the manufacturer’s recommended
operating levels, oil should be added. The AFM/POH or
placards near the access panel provide information about
the correct oil type and weight, as well as the minimum and
maximum oil quantity. [Figure 7-18]

Engine Cooling Systems
The burning fuel within the cylinders produces intense
heat, most of which is expelled through the exhaust system.
Much of the remaining heat, however, must be removed, or
at least dissipated, to prevent the engine from overheating.
Otherwise, the extremely high engine temperatures can lead
to loss of power, excessive oil consumption, detonation, and
serious engine damage.
While the oil system is vital to the internal cooling of the
engine, an additional method of cooling is necessary for
