Each time a pilot operates an aircraft, the flight normally
begins and ends at an airport. An airport may be a small sod
field or a large complex utilized by air carriers. This chapter
examines airport operations, identifies features of an airport
complex, and provides information on operating on or in the
vicinity of an airport.
Airport Categories
The definition for airports refers to any area of land or water
used or intended for landing or takeoff of aircraft. This
includes, within the five categories of airports listed below,
special types of facilities including seaplane bases, heliports,
and facilities to accommodate tilt rotor aircraft. An airport
includes an area used or intended for airport buildings,
facilities, as well as rights of way together with the buildings
and facilities.
Airport
Operations
Chapter 14

The law defines airports by categories of airport activities,
including commercial service, primary, cargo service,
reliever, and general aviation airports, as shown below:
Commercial Service Airports—publicly owned
airports that have at least 2,500 passenger boardings
each calendar year and receive scheduled passenger
service. Passenger boardings refer to revenue passenger
boardings on an aircraft in service in air commerce
whether or not in scheduled service. The definition
also includes passengers who continue on an aircraft
in international flight that stops at an airport in any of
the 50 States for a non-traffic purpose, such as refueling
or aircraft maintenance rather than passenger activity.
Passenger boardings at airports that receive scheduled
passenger service are also referred to as Enplanements.
Cargo Service Airports—airports that, in addition to any
other air transportation services that may be available,
are served by aircraft providing air transportation of
only cargo with a total annual landed weight of more
than 100 million pounds. “Landed weight” means the
weight of aircraft transporting only cargo in intrastate,
interstate, and foreign air transportation. An airport
may be both a commercial service and a cargo service
airport.
Reliever Airports—airports designated by the FAA
to relieve congestion at Commercial Service Airports
and to provide improved general aviation access to the
overall community. These may be publicly or privatelyowned.
General Aviation Airports — the remaining airports
are commonly described as General Aviation Airports.
This airport type is the largest single group of airports
in the U.S. system. The category also includes privately
owned, public use airports that enplane 2500 or more
passengers annually and receive scheduled airline
service.
Types of Airports
There are two types of airports—towered and nontowered.
These types can be further subdivided to:
Civil Airports—airports that are open to the general
public.
Military/Federal Government airports—airports
operated by the military, National Aeronautics and
Space Administration (NASA), or other agencies of
the Federal Government.
Private Airports—airports designated for private or
restricted use only, not open to the general public.
Towered Airport
A towered airport has an operating control tower. Air traffic
control (ATC) is responsible for providing the safe, orderly,
and expeditious flow of air traffic at airports where the
type of operations and/or volume of traffic requires such a
service. Pilots operating from a towered airport are required
to maintain two-way radio communication with ATC and to
acknowledge and comply with their instructions. Pilots must
advise ATC if they cannot comply with the instructions issued
and request amended instructions. A pilot may deviate from
an air traffic instruction in an emergency, but must advise
ATC of the deviation as soon as possible.
Nontowered Airport
A nontowered airport does not have an operating control
tower. Two-way radio communications are not required,
although it is a good operating practice for pilots to transmit
their intentions on the specified frequency for the benefit
of other traffic in the area. The key to communicating at an
airport without an operating control tower is selection of the
correct common frequency. The acronym CTAF, which stands
for Common Traffic Advisory Frequency, is synonymous
with this program. A CTAF is a frequency designated for
the purpose of carrying out airport advisory practices while
operating to or from an airport without an operating control
tower. The CTAF may be a Universal Integrated Community
(UNICOM), MULTICOM, Flight Service Station (FSS), or
tower frequency and is identified in appropriate aeronautical
publications. UNICOM is a nongovernment air/ground radio
communication station that may provide airport information
at public use airports where there is no tower or FSS. On pilot
request, UNICOM stations may provide pilots with weather
information, wind direction, the recommended runway, or
other necessary information. If the UNICOM frequency
is designated as the CTAF, it is identified in appropriate
aeronautical publications. Figure 14-1 lists recommended
communication procedures. More information regarding
radio communications is provided later in this chapter.
Nontowered airport traffic patterns are always entered at
pattern altitude. How you enter the pattern depends upon the
direction of arrival. The preferred method for entering from
the downwind side of the pattern is to approach the pattern
on a course 45 degrees to the downwind leg and join the
pattern at midfield.
There are several ways to enter the pattern if you’re coming
from the upwind leg side of the airport. One method of entry
from the opposite side of the pattern is to announce your
intentions and cross over midfield at least 500 feet above

UNICOM
(no tower or FSS)
No tower, FSS,
or UNICOM
No tower in
operation, FSS open
FSS closed
(no tower)
Tower or FSS
not in operation
Communicate with UNICOM
station on published CTAF
frequency (122.7, 122.8, 122.725,
122.975, or 123.0). If unable to
contact UNICOM station, use selfannounce procedures on CTAF.
Self-announce on MULTICOM
frequency 122.9.
Communicate with FSS on CTAF
frequency.
Self-announce on CTAF.
Self-announce on CTAF.
Before taxiing and
before taxiing on the
runway for departure.
Before taxiing and
before taxiing on the
runway for departure.
Before taxiing and
before taxiing on the
runway for departure.
Before taxiing and
before taxiing on the
runway for departure.
Before taxiing and
before taxiing on the
runway for departure.
10 miles out.
Entering downwind,
base, and final.
Leaving the runway.
10 miles out.
Entering downwind,
base, and final.
Leaving the runway.
10 miles out.
Entering downwind,
base, and final.
Leaving the runway.
10 miles out.
Entering downwind,
base, and final.
Leaving the runway.
10 miles out.
Entering downwind,
base, and final.
Leaving the runway.
Facility at Airport
Frequency Use
Communication/Broadcast Procedures
Departing final
approach fix (name)
or on final approach
segment inbound.
Approach
completed/terminated.
Practice Instrument
Approach
Outbound
Inbound
Figure 14-1. Recommended communication procedures.
pattern altitude (normally 1,500 feet AGL.) However, if large or
turbine aircraft operate at your airport, it is best to remain 2,000
feet AGL so you are not in conflict with their traffic pattern.
When well clear of the pattern—approximately 2 miles–scan
carefully for traffic, descend to pattern altitude, then turn right
to enter at 45° to the downwind leg at midfield. [Figure 14-2]
An alternate method is to enter on a midfield crosswind at
pattern altitude, carefully scan for traffic, announce your
intentions, and then turn downwind. [Figure 14-3] This
technique should not be used if the pattern is busy. Always
remember to give way to aircraft on the preferred 45° entry
and to aircraft already established on downwind.
In either case, it is vital to announce your intentions, and
remember to scan outside. Before joining the downwind
leg, adjust your course or speed to blend into the traffic.
Adjust power on the downwind leg, or sooner, to fit into
the flow of traffic. Avoid flying too fast or too slow. Speeds
recommended by the airplane manufacturer should be used.
They will generally fall between 70 to 80 knots for fixed-gear
singles and 80 to 90 knots for high-performance retractable.
Sources for Airport Data
When a pilot flies into a different airport, it is important to
review the current data for that airport. This data provides the
pilot with information, such as communication frequencies,
services available, closed runways, or airport construction.
Three common sources of information are:
Aeronautical Charts
Chart Supplement U.S. (formerly Airport/Facility
Directory)
Notices to Airmen (NOTAMs)
Automated Terminal Information Service (ATIS)
Aeronautical Charts
Aeronautical charts provide specific information on airports.
Chapter 16, “Navigation,” contains an excerpt from an
aeronautical chart and an aeronautical chart legend, which
provides guidance on interpreting the information on the chart.
Chart Supplement U.S. (formerly Airport/Facility
Directory)
The Chart Supplement U.S. (formerly Airport/Facility
Directory) provides the most comprehensive information on
a given airport. It contains information on airports, heliports,
and seaplane bases that are open to the public. The Chart
Supplement U.S. is published in seven books, which are
organized by regions and are revised every 56 days. The
Chart Supplement U.S. is also available digitally at www.faa.

Figure 14-4. Chart Supplement U.S. (formerly Airport/Facility
Directory excerpt.
Figure 14-3. Alternate Midfield Entry.
Figure 14-2. Preferred Entry-Crossing Midfield.
gov/air_traffic/flight_info/aeronav. Figure 14-4 contains an
excerpt from a directory. For a complete listing of information
provided in a Chart Supplement U.S. and how the information
may be decoded, refer to the “Legend Sample” located in the
front of each Chart Supplement U.S.
In addition to airport information, each Chart Supplement
U.S. contains information such as special notices, Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) and National Weather
Service (NWS) telephone numbers, preferred instrument
flight rules (IFR) routing, visual flight rules (VFR) waypoints,
a listing of very high frequency (VHF) omnidirectional range
(VOR) receiver checkpoints, aeronautical chart bulletins, land
and hold short operations (LAHSO) for selected airports,
airport diagrams for selected towered airports, en route
flight advisory service (EFAS) outlets, parachute jumping
areas, and facility telephone numbers. It is beneficial to
review a Chart Supplement U.S. to become familiar with the
information it contains.
Notices to Airmen (NOTAM)
Time-critical aeronautical information, which is of a temporary
nature or not sufficiently known in advance to permit
publication, on aeronautical charts or in other operational

publications receives immediate dissemination by the
NOTAM system. The NOTAM information could affect your
decision to make the flight. It includes such information as
taxiway and runway closures, construction, communications,
changes in status of navigational aids, and other information
essential to planned en route, terminal, or landing operations.
Exercise good judgment and common sense by carefully
regarding the information readily available in NOTAMs.
Prior to any flight, pilots should check for any NOTAMs that
could affect their intended flight. For more information on
NOTAMs, refer back to Chapter 1, “Pilot and Aeronautical
Information” section.
Automated Terminal Information Service (ATIS)
The Automated Terminal Information Service (ATIS) is a
recording of the local weather conditions and other pertinent
non-control information broadcast on a local frequency in a
looped format. It is normally updated once per hour but is
updated more often when changing local conditions warrant.
Important information is broadcast on ATIS including
weather, runways in use, specific ATC procedures, and any
airport construction activity that could affect taxi planning.
When the ATIS is recorded, it is given a code. This code is
changed with every ATIS update. For example, ATIS Alpha
is replaced by ATIS Bravo. The next hour, ATIS Charlie is
recorded, followed by ATIS Delta and progresses down the
alphabet.
Prior to calling ATC, tune to the ATIS frequency and listen to
the recorded broadcast. The broadcast ends with a statement
containing the ATIS code. For example, “Advise on initial
contact, you have information Bravo.” Upon contacting the
tower controller, state information Bravo was received. This
allows the tower controller to verify the pilot has the current
local weather and airport information without having to
state it all to each pilot who calls. This also clears the tower
frequency from being overtaken by the constant relay of
the same information, which would result without an ATIS
broadcast. The use of ATIS broadcasts at departure and arrival
airports is not only a sound practice but a wise decision.
Airport Markings and Signs
There are markings and signs used at airports that provide
directions and assist pilots in airport operations. It is important
for you to know the meanings of the signs, markings, and lights
that are used on airports as surface navigational aids. All airport
markings are painted on the surface, whereas some signs are
vertical and some are painted on the surface. An overview of the
most common signs and markings are described on the following
pages. Additional information may be found in Chapter 2,
“Aeronautical Lighting and Other Airport Visual Aids,” of
the Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM).
Runway Markings and Signs
Runway markings vary depending on the type of operations
conducted at the airport. A basic VFR runway may only
have centerline markings and runway numbers. Refer to
Appendix C of this publication for an example of the most
common runway markings that are found at airports.
Since aircraft are affected by the wind during takeoffs and
landings, runways are laid out according to the local prevailing
winds. Runway numbers are in reference to magnetic north.
Certain airports have two or even three runways laid out in the
same direction. These are referred to as parallel runways and
are distinguished by a letter added to the runway number (e.g.,
runway 36L (left), 36C (center), and 36R (right)).
Relocated Runway Threshold
It is sometimes necessary, due to construction or runway
maintenance, to close only a portion of a runway. When
a portion of a runway is closed, the runway threshold is
relocated as necessary. It is referred to as a relocated threshold
and methods for identifying the relocated threshold vary. A
common way for the relocated threshold to be marked is
a ten foot wide white bar across the width of the runway.
[Figure 14-5A and B]
When the threshold is relocated, the closed portion of the
runway is not available for use by aircraft for takeoff or
landing, but it is available for taxi. When a threshold is
relocated, it closes not only a set portion of the approach
end of a runway, but also shortens the length of the opposite
direction runway. Yellow arrow heads are placed across the
width of the runway just prior to the threshold bar.
Displaced Threshold
A displaced threshold is a threshold located at a point on
the runway other than the designated beginning of the
runway. Displacement of a threshold reduces the length
of runway available for landings. The portion of runway
behind a displaced threshold is available for takeoffs in either
direction, or landings from the opposite direction. A ten feet
wide white threshold bar is located across the width of the
runway at the displaced threshold, and white arrows are
located along the centerline in the area between the beginning
of the runway and displaced threshold. White arrow heads
are located across the width of the runway just prior to the
threshold bar. [Figure 14-6A and B]

Figure 14-5. (A) Relocated runway threshold drawing. (B) Relocated threshold for Runway 36 at Joplin Regional Airport (JLN).
Runway Safety Area
The runway safety area (RSA) is a defined surface
surrounding the runway prepared, or suitable, for reducing
the risk of damage to airplanes in the event of an undershoot,
overshoot, or excursion from the runway. The dimensions
of the RSA vary and can be determined by using the
criteria contained within AC 150/5300-13, Airport Design,
Chapter 3. Figure 3-1 in AC 150/5300-13 depicts the RSA.
Additionally, it provides greater accessibility for firefighting
and rescue equipment in emergency situations.
The RSA is typically graded and mowed. The lateral
boundaries are usually identified by the presence of the
runway holding position signs and markings on the adjoining
taxiway stubs. Aircraft should not enter the RSA without
making sure of adequate separation from other aircraft during
operations at uncontrolled airports. [Figure 14-7]
Runway Safety Area Boundary Sign
Some taxiway stubs also have a runway safety area boundary
sign that faces the runway and is visible to you only when
exiting the runway. This sign has a yellow background with
black markings and is typically used at towered airports
where a controller commonly requests you to report clear of
a runway. This sign is intended to provide you with another
visual cue that is used as a guide to determine when you are
clear of the runway safety boundary area. The sign shown in
Figure 14-8 is what you would see when exiting the runway at
Taxiway Kilo. You are out of the runway safety area boundary
when the entire aircraft passes the sign and the accompanying
surface painted marking.
Runway Holding Position Sign
Noncompliance with a runway holding position sign may
result in the FAA filing a Pilot Deviation against you. A

×
×
Figure 14-6. (A) Displaced runway threshold drawing. (B) Displaced threshold for Runway 17 at Albuquerque International Airport (ABQ).
Typical Runway Safety Area
Figure 14-7. Runway Safety Area.
Figure 14-9. Runway holding position sign at takeoff end of Runway
14 with collocated Taxiway Alpha location sign.
Figure 14-8. Runway safety area boundary sign and marking located
on Taxiway Kilo.
runway holding position sign is an airport version of a
stop sign. [Figure 14-9] It may be seen as a sign and/or its
characters painted on the airport pavement. The sign has
white characters outlined in black on a red background. It is
always collocated with the surface painted holding position
markings and is located where taxiways intersect runways.
On taxiways that intersect the threshold of the takeoff runway,
only the designation of the runway may appear on the sign.
If a taxiway intersects a runway somewhere other than at
the threshold, the sign has the designation of the intersecting
runway. The runway numbers on the sign are arranged to
correspond to the relative location of the respective runway
thresholds. Figure 14-10 shows “18-36” to indicate the
threshold for Runway 18 is to the left and the threshold for

Figure 14-10. Runway holding position sign at a location other
than the takeoff end of Runway 18-36 with collocated Taxiway
Alpha location sign.
Runway 36 is to the right. The sign also indicates that you
are located on Taxiway Alpha.
If the runway holding position sign is located on a taxiway
at the intersection of two runways, the designations for
both runways are shown on the sign along with arrows
showing the approximate alignment of each runway.
[Figure 14-11A and B] In addition to showing the
approximate runway alignment, the arrows indicate the
direction(s) to the threshold of the runway whose designation
is immediately next to each corresponding arrow.
This type of taxiway and runway/runway intersection
geometry can be very confusing and create navigational
challenges. Extreme caution must be exercised when taxiing
onto or crossing this type of intersection. Figure 14-11A and
B shows a depiction of a taxiway, runway/runway intersection
and is also designated as a “hot spot” on the airport diagram.
In the example, Taxiway Bravo intersects with two runways,
31-13 and 35-17, which cross each other.
Surface painted runway holding position signs may also be
used to aid you in determining the holding position. These
markings consist of white characters on a red background
and are painted on the left side of the taxiway centerline.
Figure 14-12 shows a surface painted runway holding
position sign that is the holding point for Runway 32R-14L.
You should never allow any part of your aircraft to cross the
runway holding position sign (either a vertical or surface
painted sign) without a clearance from ATC. Doing so poses
a hazard to yourself and others.
When the tower is closed or you are operating at a nontowered
airport, you may taxi past a runway holding position sign only
when the runway is clear of aircraft, and there are no aircraft on
final approach. You may then proceed with extreme caution.
Runway Holding Position Marking
Noncompliance with a runway holding position marking
may result in the FAA filing a Pilot Deviation against you.
Runway holding position markings consist of four yellow
lines, two solid and two dashed, that are painted on the surface
and extend across the width of the taxiway to indicate where
the aircraft should stop when approaching a runway. These
markings are painted across the entire taxiway pavement, are
in alignment, and are collocated with the holding position
sign as described above.
As you approach the runway, two solid yellow lines and two
dashed lines will be visible. Prior to reaching the solid lines, it
is imperative to stop and ensure that no portion of the aircraft
intersects the first solid yellow line. Do not cross the double
solid lines until a clearance from ATC has been received.
[Figure 14-13] When the tower is closed or when operating at
a nontowered airport, you may taxi onto or across the runway
only when the runway is clear and there are no aircraft on final
approach. You should use extreme caution when crossing or
taxiing onto the runway and always look both ways.
When exiting the runway, the same markings will be seen
except the aircraft will be approaching the double dashed
lines. [Figure 14-14] In order to be clear of the runway, the
entire aircraft must cross both the dashed and solid lines.
An ATC clearance is not needed to cross this marking when
exiting the runway.
Runway Distance Remaining Signs
Runway distance remaining signs have a black background
with a white number and may be installed along one or both
sides of the runway. [Figure 14-15] The number on the
signs indicates the distance, in thousands of feet, of landing
runway remaining. The last sign, which has the numeral “1,”
is located at least 950 feet from the runway end.
Runway Designation Marking
Runway numbers and letters are determined from the
approach direction. The runway number is the whole number
nearest one-tenth the magnetic azimuth of the centerline of the
runway, measured clockwise from the magnetic north. In the
case where there are parallel runways, the letters differentiate
between left (L), right (R), or center (C). [Figure 14-16] For
example, if there are two parallel runways, they would show
the designation number and then either L or R beneath it.
For three parallel runways, the designation number would
be presented with L, C, or R beneath it.

NC-3, 08 MAR 2012 to 05 APR 2012
NC-3, 08 MAR 2012 to 05 APR 2012
Not to be used for navigation
Runway 13
Runway 31
Figure 14-11. (A) Taxiway Bravo location sign collocated with runway/runway intersection holding signs at Sioux Gateway Airport
(SUX) (B) Airport diagram of Sioux Gateway Airport (SUX), Sioux City, Iowa. The area outlined in red is a designated “hot spot” (HS1).

Figure 14-12. Surface painted runway holding position signs for
Runway 32R-14L along with the enhanced taxiway centerline marking.
Figure 14-13. Surface painted holding position marking along with
enhanced taxiway centerline.
Figure 14-14. Runway holding position markings as seen when
exiting the runway. When exiting the runway, no ATC clearance
is required to cross.
Figure 14-15. Runway distance remaining sign indicating that there
is 2,000 feet of runway remaining.
Land and Hold Short Operations (LAHSO)
When simultaneous operations (takeoffs and landings) are
being conducted on intersecting runways, Land and Hold
Short Operations (LAHSO) may also be in effect. LAHSO
is an ATC procedure that may require your participation and
compliance. As pilot in command (PIC), you have the final
authority to accept or decline any LAHSO clearance.
If issued a land and hold short clearance, you must be aware
of the reduced runway distances and whether or not you can
comply before accepting the clearance. You do not have
to accept a LAHSO clearance. Pilots should only receive a
LAHSO clearance when there is a minimum ceiling of 1,000
feet and 3 statute miles of visibility.
Runway holding position signs and markings are installed
on those runways used for LAHSO. The signs and markings
are placed at the LAHSO point to aid you in determining
where to stop and hold the aircraft and are located prior to
the runway/runway intersection. [Figure 14-17]
The holding position sign has a white inscription with black
border around the numbers on a red background and is installed
adjacent to the holding position markings. If you accept a land
and hold short clearance, you must comply so that no portion
of the aircraft extends beyond these hold markings.
If receiving “cleared to land” instructions from ATC, you
are authorized to use the entire landing length of the runway
and should disregard any LAHSO holding position markings
located on the runway. If you receive and accept LAHSO
instructions, you must stop short of the intersecting runway
prior to the LAHSO signs and markings.
Below is a list of items which, if thoroughly understood
and complied with, will ensure that LAHSO operations are
conducted properly.
Know landing distance available.
Be advised by ATC as to why LAHSO are being
conducted.

Figure 14-16. Two of three parallel runways.
Figure 14-17. Runway holding position sign and marking for LAHSO.
Advise ATC if you cannot comply with LAHSO.
Know what signs and markings are at the LAHSO point.
LAHSO are not authorized for student pilots who are
performing a solo flight.
At many airports air carrier aircraft are not authorized
to participate in LAHSO if the other aircraft is a
general aviation aircraft.
Generally, LAHSO are not authorized at night.
LAHSO are not authorized on wet runways.
If you accept the following clearance from ATC: “Cleared to
land Runway 36 hold short of Runway 23,” you must either exit
Runway 36 or stop at the holding position prior to Runway 23.
Taxiway Markings and Signs
Taxiway direction signs have a yellow background and
black characters, which identifies the designation or
intersecting taxiways. Arrows indicate the direction of turn
that would place the aircraft on the designated taxiway.
[Figure 14-18] Direction signs are normally located on
the left side of the taxiway and prior to the intersection.
These signs and markings (with a yellow background and
black characters) indicate the direction toward a different
taxiway, leading off a runway, or out of an intersection.
Figure 14-18 shows Taxiway Delta and how Taxiway Bravo
intersects ahead at 90° both left and right.
Taxiway direction signs can also be displayed as surface
painted markings. Figure 14-19 shows Taxiway Bravo as
proceeding straight ahead while Taxiway Alpha turns to the
right at approximately 45°.

Figure 14-18. Taxiway Bravo direction sign with a collocated
Taxiway Delta location sign. When the arrow on the direction
sign indicates a turn, the sign is located prior to the intersection.
Figure 14-19. Surface painted taxiway direction signs.
Figure 14-20A and B shows an example of a direction sign at
a complex taxiway intersection. Figure 14-20A and B shows
Taxiway Bravo intersects with Taxiway Sierra at 90°, but at
45° with Taxiway Foxtrot. This type of array can be displayed
with or without the taxiway location sign, which in this case
would be Taxiway Bravo.
Enhanced Taxiway Centerline Markings
At most towered airports, the enhanced taxiway centerline
marking is used to warn you of an upcoming runway. It consists
of yellow dashed lines on either side of the normal solid taxiway
centerline and the dashes extend up to 150 feet prior to a
runway holding position marking. [Figure 14-21A and B] They
are used to aid you in maintaining awareness during surface
movement to reduce runway incursions.
Destination Signs
Destination signs have black characters on a yellow
background indicating a destination at the airport. These
signs always have an arrow showing the direction of the taxi
route to that destination. [Figure 14-22] When the arrow on
the destination sign indicates a turn, the sign is located prior
to the intersection. Destinations commonly shown on these
types of signs include runways, aprons, terminals, military
areas, civil aviation areas, cargo areas, international areas,
and fixed-base operators. When the inscription for two or
more destinations having a common taxi route are placed
on a sign, the destinations are separated by a “dot” (•) and
one arrow would be used as shown in Figure 14-22. When
the inscription on a sign contains two or more destinations
having different taxi routes, each destination is accompanied
by an arrow and separated from the other destination(s) on
the sign with a vertical black message divider as shown in
Figure 14-23. The example shown in Figure 14-23 shows
two signs. The sign in the foreground explains that Runway
20 threshold is to the left, and Runways 32, 2, and 14 are to
the right. The sign in the background indicates that you are
located on Taxiway Bravo and Taxiway November will take
you to those runways.
Holding Position Signs and Markings for an
Instrument Landing System (ILS) Critical Area
The instrument landing system (ILS) broadcasts signals to
arriving instrument aircraft to guide them to the runway. Each
of these ILSs have critical areas that must be kept clear of all
obstacles in order to ensure quality of the broadcast signal. At
many airports, taxiways extend into the ILS critical area. Most
of the time, this is of no concern; however, during times of
poor weather, an aircraft on approach may depend on a good
signal quality. When necessary, ATC will protect the ILS
critical area for arrival instrument traffic by instructing taxiing
aircraft to “hold short” of Runway (XX) ILS critical area.
The ILS critical area hold sign has white characters, outlined
in black, on a red background and is installed adjacent to the
ILS holding position markings. [Figure 14-24] The holding
position markings for the ILS critical area appear on the
pavement as a horizontal yellow ladder extending across the
width of the taxiway.
When instructed to “hold short of Runway (XX) ILS critical
area,” you must ensure no portion of the aircraft extends
beyond these markings. [Figure 14-25] If ATC does not
instruct you to hold at this point, then you may bypass the ILS
critical area hold position markings and continue with your
taxi. Figure 14-24 shows that the ILS hold sign is located
on Taxiway Golf and the ILS ladder hold position marking
is adjacent to the hold sign.

Figure 14-20. Orientation of signs is from left to right in a clockwise manner. Left turn signs are on the left and right turn on the right.
In this view, the pilot is on Taxiway Bravo.
Prepare to STOP unless you have been cleared onto
or across the runway by ATC.
Figure 14-21. (A) Enhanced taxiway centerline marking. (B) Enhanced taxiway centerline marking and runway holding position marking.
Enhanced taxiway centerline marking extends 150 feet prior
to a runway holding position marking. Prepare to STOP.

Figure 14-24. Instrument landing system (ILS) holding position sign
and marking on Taxiway Golf.
ILS Critical Area boundary
ILS
Hold only
when
specifically
instructed by ATC
The yellow surface
painted “ladder”
marking and red ILS
sign are located
on taxiways where
the taxiways intersect
the ILS critical area.
Figure 14-25. Holding position sign and marking for instrument
landing system (ILS) critical area boundary.
Figure 14-22. Destination sign to the fixed-base operator (FBO).
Figure 14-23. Runway destination sign with different taxi routes.
Holding Position Markings for Taxiway/Taxiway
Intersections
Holding position markings for taxiway/taxiway intersections
consist of a single dashed yellow line extending across the
width of the taxiway. [Figure 14-26] They are painted on
taxiways where ATC normally holds aircraft short of a
taxiway intersection. When instructed by ATC “hold short
of Taxiway X,” you should stop so that no part of your
aircraft extends beyond the holding position marking. When
the marking is not present, you should stop your aircraft at
a point that provides adequate clearance from an aircraft on
the intersecting taxiway.
Marking and Lighting of Permanently Closed
Runways and Taxiways
For runways and taxiways that are permanently closed, the
lighting circuits are disconnected. The runway threshold,
runway designation, and touchdown markings are obliterated
and yellow “Xs” are placed at each end of the runway and
at 1,000-foot intervals.

Figure 14-27. (A) Yellow “X” placed on surface of temporarily closed
runways. (B) Lighted “X” placed on temporarily closed runways.
(C) Lighted “X” at night showing a temporarily closed runway.
Figure 14-26. Holding position marking on a taxiway.
Location signs—black with yellow inscription and a
yellow border, no arrows. They are used to identify a
taxiway or runway location, to identify the boundary
of the runway, or identify an instrument landing
system (ILS) critical area.
Temporarily Closed Runways and Taxiways
For temporarily closed runways and taxiways, a visual
indication is often provided with yellow “Xs” or raised
lighted yellow “Xs” placed at each end of the runway.
Depending on the reason for the closure, duration of closure,
airfield configuration, and the existence and the hours of
operation of an ATC tower, a visual indication may not be
present. As discussed previously in the chapter, you must
always check NOTAMs and ATIS for runway and taxiway
closure information.
Figure 14-27A shows an example of a yellow “X” laid flat
with an adequate number of heavy sand bags to keep the
wind from getting under and displacing the vinyl material.
A very effective and preferable visual aid to depict temporary
closure is the lighted “X” placed on or near the runway
designation numbers. [Figure 14-27B and C] This device is
much more discernible to approaching aircraft than the other
materials described above.
Other Markings
Some other markings found on the airport include vehicle
roadway markings, VOR receiver checkpoint markings, and
non-movement area boundary markings.
Airport Signs
There are six types of signs that may be found at airports. The
more complex the layout of an airport, the more important
the signs become to pilots. Appendix C of this publication
shows examples of some signs that are found at most airports,
their purpose, and appropriate pilot action. The six types of
signs are:
Mandatory instruction signs—red background with
white inscription. These signs denote an entrance to a
runway, critical area, or prohibited area.

White
White
Yellow
Green
Figure 14-28. Airport rotating beacons.
Direction signs—yellow background with black
inscription. The inscription identifies the designation
of the intersecting taxiway(s) leading out of an
intersection.
Destination signs—yellow background with black
inscription and arrows. These signs provide information
on locating areas, such as runways, terminals, cargo
areas, and civil aviation areas.
Information signs—yellow background with black
inscription. These signs are used to provide the pilot
with information on areas that cannot be seen from the
control tower, applicable radio frequencies, and noise
abatement procedures. The airport operator determines
the need, size, and location of these signs.
Runway distance remaining signs—black background
with white numbers. The numbers indicate the
distance of the remaining runway in thousands of feet.
Airport Lighting
The majority of airports have some type of lighting for night
operations. The variety and type of lighting systems depends
on the volume and complexity of operations at a given airport.
Airport lighting is standardized so that airports use the same
light colors for runways and taxiways.
Airport Beacon
Airport beacons help a pilot identify an airport at night.
The beacons are normally operated from dusk until dawn.
Sometimes they are turned on if the ceiling is less than 1,000
feet and/or the ground visibility is less than 3 statute miles (VFR
minimums). However, there is no requirement for this, so a
pilot has the responsibility of determining if the weather meets
VFR requirements. The beacon has a vertical light distribution
to make it most effective from 1–10° above the horizon,
although it can be seen well above or below this spread. The
beacon may be an omnidirectional capacitor-discharge device,
or it may rotate at a constant speed, that produces the visual
effect of flashes at regular intervals. The combination of light
colors from an airport beacon indicates the type of airport.
[Figure 14-28] Some of the most common beacons are:
Flashing white and green for civilian land airports
Flashing white and yellow for a water airport
Flashing white, yellow, and green for a heliport
Two quick white flashes alternating with a green flash
identifying a military airport
Approach Light Systems
Approach light systems are primarily intended to provide a
means to transition from instrument flight to visual flight for
landing. The system configuration depends on whether the
runway is a precision or nonprecision instrument runway.
Some systems include sequenced flashing lights that appear
to the pilot as a ball of light traveling toward the runway at
high speed. Approach lights can also aid pilots operating
under VFR at night.
Visual Glideslope Indicators
Visual glideslope indicators provide the pilot with glidepath
information that can be used for day or night approaches. By
maintaining the proper glidepath as provided by the system,
a pilot should have adequate obstacle clearance and should
touch down within a specified portion of the runway.
Visual Approach Slope Indicator (VASI)
VASI installations are the most common visual glidepath
systems in use. The VASI provides obstruction clearance
within 10° of the extended runway centerline and up to four
nautical miles (NM) from the runway threshold.
The VASI consists of light units arranged in bars. There are
2-bar and 3-bar VASIs. The 2-bar VASI has near and far light
bars and the 3-bar VASI has near, middle, and far light bars.
Two-bar VASI installations provide one visual glidepath
that is normally set at 3°. The 3-bar system provides two
glidepaths, the lower glidepath normally set at 3° and the
upper glidepath ¼ degree above the lower glidepath.
The basic principle of the VASI is that of color differentiation
between red and white. Each light unit projects a beam of
light, a white segment in the upper part of the beam and a
red segment in the lower part of the beam. The lights are
arranged so the pilot sees the combination of lights shown in
Figure 14-29 to indicate below, on, or above the glidepath.
Other Glidepath Systems
A precision approach path indicator (PAPI) uses lights similar
to the VASI system, except they are installed in a single row,
normally on the left side of the runway. [Figure 14-30]

On Glidepath
Below Glidepath
Above Glidepath
Far Bar
Near Bar
Far Bar
Near Bar
Far Bar
Near Bar
Figure 14-29. Two-bar VASI system.
High
more than 3.5°
Slightly High
   3.2°
On Glidepath
   3°
Slightly Low
    2.8°
Low
less than 2.5°
Figure 14-30. Precision approach path indicator for a typical 3° glide slope.
Below glidepath
Above glidepath
On glidepath
Amber
Red
Green
Amber
Figure 14-31. Tri-color visual approach slope indicator.
A tri-color system consists of a single-light unit projecting
a three-color visual approach path. Below the glidepath is
indicated by red, on the glidepath is indicated by green, and
above the glidepath is indicated by amber. When descending
below the glidepath, there is a small area of dark amber. Pilots
should not mistake this area for an “above the glidepath”
indication. [Figure 14-31]
Pulsating VASIs normally consist of a single-light unit
projecting a two-color visual approach path into the final
approach area of the runway upon which the indicator is
installed. The “on glidepath” indication is a steady white
light. The “slightly below glidepath” indication is a steady red
light. If the aircraft descends further below the glidepath, the
red light starts to pulsate. The “above glidepath” indication
is a pulsating white light. The pulsating rate increases as the
aircraft gets further above or below the desired glideslope.
The useful range of the system is about four miles during the
day and up to ten miles at night. [Figure 14-32]
Runway Lighting
There are various lights that identify parts of the runway
complex. These assist a pilot in safely making a takeoff or
landing during night operations.
Runway End Identifier Lights (REIL)
Runway end identifier lights (REIL) are installed at many
airfields to provide rapid and positive identification of the
approach end of a particular runway. The system consists
of a pair of synchronized flashing lights located laterally
on each side of the runway threshold. REILs may be either
omnidirectional or unidirectional facing the approach area.
Runway Edge Lights
Runway edge lights are used to outline the edges of
runways at night or during low visibility conditions.
[Figure 14-33] These lights are classified according to the
intensity they are capable of producing: high intensity runway
lights (HIRL), medium intensity runway lights (MIRL), and

Below glidepath
Above glidepath
On glidepath
Pulsating
white
Pulsating red
Steady
white
Threshold
Slightly below glidepath
Steady
red
Figure 14-32. Pulsating visual approach slope indicator.
Figure 14-33. Runway lights.
low intensity runway lights (LIRL). The HIRL and MIRL
have variable intensity settings. These lights are white, except
on instrument runways where amber lights are used on the
last 2,000 feet or half the length of the runway, whichever
is less. The lights marking the end of the runway are red.
In-Runway Lighting
Runway centerline lighting system (RCLS)—installed on some
precision approach runways to facilitate landing under adverse
visibility conditions. They are located along the runway
centerline and are spaced at 50-foot intervals. When viewed
from the landing threshold, the runway centerline lights are
white until the last 3,000 feet of the runway. The white lights
begin to alternate with red for the next 2,000 feet. For the
remaining 1,000 feet of the runway, all centerline lights are red.
Touchdown zone lights (TDZL)—installed on some precision
approach runways to indicate the touchdown zone when
landing under adverse visibility conditions. They consist of
two rows of transverse light bars disposed symmetrically
about the runway centerline. The system consists of steadyburning white lights that start 100 feet beyond the landing
threshold and extend to 3,000 feet beyond the landing
threshold or to the midpoint of the runway, whichever is less.
Taxiway centerline lead-off lights—provide visual guidance
to persons exiting the runway. They are color-coded to warn
pilots and vehicle drivers that they are within the runway
environment or ILS critical area, whichever is more restrictive.
Alternate green and yellow lights are installed, beginning
with green, from the runway centerline to one centerline light
position beyond the runway holding position or ILS critical
area holding position.
Taxiway centerline lead-on lights—provide visual guidance
to persons entering the runway. These “lead-on” lights are
also color-coded with the same color pattern as lead-off
lights to warn pilots and vehicle drivers that they are within
the runway environment or ILS critical area, whichever is
more conservative. The fixtures used for lead-on lights are
bidirectional (i.e., one side emits light for the lead-on function
while the other side emits light for the lead-off function). Any
fixture that emits yellow light for the lead-off function also
emits yellow light for the lead-on function.
Land and hold short lights—used to indicate the hold short
point on certain runways which are approved for LAHSO.
Land and hold short lights consist of a row of pulsing white
lights installed across the runway at the hold short point.
Where installed, the lights are on anytime LAHSO is in effect.
These lights are off when LAHSO is not in effect.
Control of Airport Lighting
Airport lighting is controlled by ATC at towered airports. At
nontowered airports, the lights may be on a timer, or where an
FSS is located at an airport, the FSS personnel may control the
lighting. A pilot may request various light systems be turned
on or off and also request a specified intensity, if available,
from ATC or FSS personnel. At selected nontowered airports,
the pilot may control the lighting by using the radio. This
is done by selecting a specified frequency and clicking the
radio microphone. [Figure 14-34] For information on pilot
controlled lighting at various airports, refer to the Chart
Supplement U.S. (formerly Airport/Facility Directory).

Function
Key Mike
Highest intensity available
Medium or lower intensity
(Lower REIL or REIL off)
Lowest intensity available
(Lower REIL or REIL off)
7 times within 5 seconds
5 times within 5 seconds
3 times within 5 seconds
Figure 14-34. Radio controlled runway lighting.
Taxiway Lights
Similar to runway lighting, taxiways also have various lights
which help pilots identify areas of the taxiway and any
surrounding runways.
Omnidirectional
Omnidirectional taxiway lights outline the edges of the
taxiway and are blue in color. At many airports, these
edge lights may have variable intensity settings that may
be adjusted by an ATC when deemed necessary or when
requested by the pilot. Some airports also have taxiway
centerline lights that are green in color.
Clearance Bar Lights
Clearance bar lights are installed at holding positions on
taxiways in order to increase the conspicuity of the holding
position in low visibility conditions. They may also be
installed to indicate the location of an intersecting taxiway
during periods of darkness. Clearance bars consist of three
in-pavement steady-burning yellow lights.
Runway Guard Lights
Runway guard lights are installed at taxiway/runway
intersections. They are primarily used to enhance the
conspicuity of taxiway/runway intersections during low
visibility conditions, but may be used in all weather conditions.
Runway guard lights consist of either a pair of elevated flashing
yellow lights installed on either side of the taxiway, or a row of
in-pavement yellow lights installed across the entire taxiway,
at the runway holding position marking.
Note: Some airports may have a row of three or five
in-pavement yellow lights installed at taxiway/runway
intersections. They should not be confused with clearance
bar lights described previously in this section.
Stop Bar Lights
Stop bar lights, when installed, are used to confirm the ATC
clearance to enter or cross the active runway in low visibility
conditions (below 1,200 ft Runway Visual Range (RVR)).
A stop bar consists of a row of red, unidirectional, steadyburning in-pavement lights installed across the entire taxiway
at the runway holding position, and elevated steady-burning
red lights on each side. A controlled stop bar is operated in
conjunction with the taxiway centerline lead-on lights which
extend from the stop bar toward the runway. Following the
ATC clearance to proceed, the stop bar is turned off and the
lead-on lights are turned on. The stop bar and lead-on lights
are automatically reset by a sensor or backup timer.
Obstruction Lights
Obstructions are marked or lighted to warn pilots of
their presence during daytime and nighttime conditions.
Obstruction lighting can be found both on and off an airport
to identify obstructions. They may be marked or lighted in
any of the following conditions.
Red obstruction lights—flash or emit a steady red
color during nighttime operations, and the obstructions
are painted orange and white for daytime operations.
High intensity white obstruction lights—flash high
intensity white lights during the daytime with the
intensity reduced for nighttime.
Dual lighting—a combination of flashing red beacons
and steady red lights for nighttime operation and high
intensity white lights for daytime operations.
New Lighting Technologies
A top priority of the FAA is to continue to enhance airport
safety while maintaining airport capacity. Reducing runway
incursions is a major component of this effort. Runway
incursions develop quickly and without warning during routine
traffic situations on the airport surface, leaving little time for
corrective action. The Runway Status Lights (RWSL) System
is designed to provide a direct indication to you that it is unsafe
to enter a runway, cross a runway, or takeoff from or land on
a runway when the system is activated.
Runway status lights are red in color and indicate runway
status only; they do not indicate clearance to enter a runway
or clearance to takeoff. The RWSL system provides warning
lights on runways and taxiways, illuminating when it is unsafe
to enter, cross, or begin takeoff on a runway. Currently, there
are two types: Runway Entrance Lights (REL) and Takeoff
Hold Lights (THL). [Figures 14-35 and 14-36]
REL provide a warning to aircraft crossing or entering a
runway from intersecting taxiways that there is conflicting
traffic on the runway. THL provide a warning signal to
aircraft in position for takeoff that the runway is occupied
and it is unsafe to take off. As of 2016, the RWSL system is
operational at 14 of the nation’s busiest airports with 3 more
airports scheduled to receive the system by 2017.

Figure 14-35. Runway Entrance Lights (REL).
Figure 14-36. Takeoff Hold Lights (THL).
Wind Direction Indicators
It is important for a pilot to know the direction of the wind. At
facilities with an operating control tower, this information is
provided by ATC. Information may also be provided by FSS
personnel either located at a particular airport or remotely
available through a remote communication outlet (RCO), or
by requesting information on a CTAF at airports that have the
capacity to receive and broadcast on this frequency.
When none of these services is available, it is possible
to determine wind direction and runway in use by visual
wind indicators. A pilot should check these wind indicators
even when information is provided on the CTAF at a given
airport because there is no assurance that the information
provided is accurate.
The wind direction indicator can be a wind cone, wind sock,
tetrahedron, or wind tee. These are usually located in a central
location near the runway and may be placed in the center
of a segmented circle, which identifies the traffic pattern
direction if it is other than the standard left-hand pattern.
[Figures 14-37 and 14-38]
The wind sock is a good source of information since it not
only indicates wind direction but allows the pilot to estimate
the wind velocity and/or gust factor. The wind sock extends
out straighter in strong winds and tends to move back and
forth when the wind is gusting. Wind tees and tetrahedrons
can swing freely and align themselves with the wind direction.
Since a wind tee or tetrahedron can also be manually set to
align with the runway in use, a pilot should also look at the
wind sock for wind information, if one is available.
Traffic Patterns
At airports without an operating control tower, a segmented
circle visual indicator system, if installed, is designed to
provide traffic pattern information. [Figure 14-38] Usually
located in a position affording maximum visibility to pilots in
the air and on the ground and providing a centralized location
for other elements of the system, the segmented circle consists
of the following components: wind direction indicators,
landing direction indicators, landing strip indicators, and
traffic pattern indicators.
A tetrahedron is installed to indicate the direction of landings
and takeoffs when conditions at the airport warrant its use.
It may be located at the center of a segmented circle and
may be lighted for night operations. The small end of the
tetrahedron points in the direction of landing. Pilots are
cautioned against using a tetrahedron for any purpose other
than as an indicator of landing direction. At airports with
control towers, the tetrahedron should only be referenced
when the control tower is not in operation. Tower instructions
supersede tetrahedron indications.
Landing strip indicators are installed in pairs and are used to
show the alignment of landing strips. [Figure 14-38] Traffic
pattern indicators are arranged in pairs in conjunction with
landing strip indicators and used to indicate the direction of
turns when there is a variation from the normal left traffic
pattern. (If there is no segmented circle installed at the airport,
traffic pattern indicators may be installed on or near the end
of the runway.)
At most airports and military air bases, traffic pattern altitudes
for propeller-driven aircraft generally extend from 600 feet
to as high as 1,500 feet above ground level (AGL). Pilots
can obtain the traffic pattern altitude for an airport from the
Chart Supplement U.S. (formerly Airport/Facility Directory).
Also, traffic pattern altitudes for military turbojet aircraft
sometimes extend up to 2,500 feet AGL. Therefore, pilots of
en route aircraft should be constantly on alert for other aircraft
in traffic patterns and avoid these areas whenever possible.
When operating at an airport, traffic pattern altitudes should
be maintained unless otherwise required by the applicable
distance from cloud criteria according to Title 14 of the Code
of Federal Regulations (14 CFR) part 91, section 91.155.
Additional information on airport traffic pattern operations

Tetrahedron
Wind sock or cone
Wind tee
WIND
Figure 14-37. Wind direction indicators.
Wind cone
Landing runway
or landing strip
indicators
Landing direction
indicator
Traffic pattern
indicators
Figure 14-38. Segmented circle.
can be found in Chapter 4, “Air Traffic Control,” of the AIM.
Pilots can find traffic pattern information and restrictions, such
as noise abatement in the Chart Supplement U.S. (formerly
Airport/Facility Directory).
Example: Key to Traffic Pattern Operations—
Single Runway
Enter pattern in level flight, abeam the midpoint
of the runway, at pattern altitude. (1,000' AGL is
recommended pattern altitude unless otherwise
established.) [Figure 14-39]
Maintain pattern altitude until abeam approach end of
the landing runway on downwind leg. [Figure 14-39]
Complete turn to final at least ¼ mile from the runway.
[Figure 14-39]
After takeoff or go-around, continue straight ahead
until beyond departure end of runway. [Figure 14-39]
If remaining in the traffic pattern, commence turn to
crosswind leg beyond the departure end of the runway
within 300 feet of pattern altitude. [Figure 14-39]
If departing the traffic pattern, continue straight out,
or exit with a 45° turn (to the left when in a left-hand
traffic pattern; to the right when in a right-hand traffic
pattern) beyond the departure end of the runway, after
reaching pattern altitude. [Figure 14-39]
Example: Key to Traffic Pattern Operations—
Parallel Runways
Enter pattern in level flight, abeam the midpoint
of the runway, at pattern altitude. (1,000' AGL is
recommended pattern altitude unless otherwise
established.) [Figure 14-40]
Maintain pattern altitude until abeam approach end of
the landing runway on downwind leg. [Figure 14-40]
Complete turn to final at least ¼ mile from the runway.
[Figure 14-40]
Do not overshoot final or continue on a track that
penetrates the final approach of the parallel runway
After takeoff or go-around, continue straight ahead
until beyond departure end of runway. [Figure 14-40]

LEGEND
Recommended standard left-hand traffic
pattern (depicted)
(standard right-hand
traffic pattern would be mirror image)
RUNWAY
Final
Departure
Downwind
Base
Crosswind
Departure
Departure
Entry
Application of traffic
pattern indicators
Segmented circle
Figure 14-39. Traffic pattern operations—single runway.
If remaining in the traffic pattern, commence turn to
crosswind leg beyond the departure end of the runway
within 300 feet of pattern altitude. [Figure 14-40]
7.
If departing the traffic pattern, continue straight out,
or exit with a 45° turn (to the left when in a left-hand
traffic pattern; to the right when in a right-hand traffic
pattern) beyond the departure end of the runway, after
reaching pattern altitude. [Figure 14-40]
8.
Do not continue on a track that penetrates the departure
path of the parallel runway. [Figure 14-40]
Radio Communications
Operating in and out of a towered airport, as well as in a good
portion of the airspace system, requires that an aircraft have twoway radio communication capability. For this reason, a pilot
should be knowledgeable of radio station license requirements
and radio communications equipment and procedures.
Radio License
There is no license requirement for a pilot operating in the
United States; however, a pilot who operates internationally
is required to hold a restricted radiotelephone permit issued
by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). There
is also no station license requirement for most general
aviation aircraft operating in the United States. A station
license is required, however, for an aircraft that is operating
internationally, that uses other than a VHF radio, and that
meets other criteria.
Radio Equipment
In general aviation, the most common types of radios are
VHF. A VHF radio operates on frequencies between 118.0
megahertz (MHz) and 136.975 MHz and is classified as
720 or 760 depending on the number of channels it can
accommodate. The 720 and 760 use .025 MHz (25 kilohertz
(KHz) spacing (118.025, 118.050) with the 720 having a
frequency range up to 135.975 MHz and the 760 reaching
up to 136.975 MHz. VHF radios are limited to line of sight
transmissions; therefore, aircraft at higher altitudes are able
to transmit and receive at greater distances.
In March of 1997, the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO) amended its International Standards and Recommended
Practices to incorporate a channel plan specifying 8.33 kHz
channel spacings in the Aeronautical Mobile Service. The
8.33 kHz channel plan was adopted to alleviate the shortage of
VHF ATC channels experienced in western Europe and in the
United Kingdom. Seven western European countries and the
United Kingdom implemented the 8.33 kHz channel plan on
January 1, 1999. Accordingly, aircraft operating in the airspace
of these countries must have the capability of transmitting and
receiving on the 8.33 kHz spaced channels.
Using Proper Radio Procedures
Using proper radio phraseology and procedures contribute to
a pilot’s ability to operate safely and efficiently in the airspace
system. A review of the Pilot/Controller Glossary contained
in the AIM assists a pilot in the use and understanding of

Figure 14-40. Traffic pattern operation—parallel runways.
LEGEND
Standard left-hand
traffic pattern (depicted)
Right-hand traffic
pattern (depicted)
Final
Departure
Base
Crosswind
Final
Departure
Base
Crosswind
Downwind
Entry
No transgression zone
No transgression zone
Segmented circle
standard terminology. The AIM also contains many examples
