In order to safely fly any aircraft, a pilot must understand
how to interpret and operate the flight instruments. The
pilot also needs to be able to recognize associated errors and
malfunctions of these instruments. This chapter addresses the
pitot-static system and associated instruments, the vacuum
system and related instruments, gyroscopic instruments, and
the magnetic compass. When a pilot understands how each
instrument works and recognizes when an instrument is
malfunctioning, he or she can safely utilize the instruments
to their fullest potential.
Pitot-Static Flight Instruments
The pitot-static system is a combined system that utilizes the
static air pressure and the dynamic pressure due to the motion
of the aircraft through the air. These combined pressures are
utilized for the operation of the airspeed indicator (ASI),
altimeter, and vertical speed indicator (VSI). [Figure 8-1]
Flight
Chapter 8

Instruments

Figure 8-1. Pitot-static system and instruments.
30.0
29.9
29.8
Altimeter
Heater (35 watts)
Static port
Vertical speed indicator (VSI)
Airspeed indicator (ASI)
Pitot heater switch
Drain hole
Pressure chamber
Alternate static source
Static hole
Heater (100 watts)
Pitot tube
Baffle plate
Static chamber
Ram air
Impact Pressure Chamber and Lines
The pitot tube is utilized to measure the total combined
pressures that are present when an aircraft moves through
the air. Static pressure, also known as ambient pressure, is
always present whether an aircraft is moving or at rest. It is
simply the barometric pressure in the local area. Dynamic
pressure is present only when an aircraft is in motion;
therefore, it can be thought of as a pressure due to motion.
Wind also generates dynamic pressure. It does not matter if
the aircraft is moving through still air at 70 knots or if the
aircraft is facing a wind with a speed of 70 knots, the same
dynamic pressure is generated.
When the wind blows from an angle less than 90° off the
nose of the aircraft, dynamic pressure can be depicted on the
ASI. The wind moving across the airfoil at 20 knots is the
same as the aircraft moving through calm air at 20 knots.
The pitot tube captures the dynamic pressure, as well as the
static pressure that is always present.
The pitot tube has a small opening at the front that allows
the total pressure to enter the pressure chamber. The total
pressure is made up of dynamic pressure plus static pressure.
In addition to the larger hole in the front of the pitot tube,
there is a small hole in the back of the chamber that allows
moisture to drain from the system should the aircraft enter
precipitation. Both openings in the pitot tube must be checked
prior to flight to ensure that neither is blocked. Many aircraft
have pitot tube covers installed when they sit for extended
periods of time. This helps to keep bugs and other objects
from becoming lodged in the opening of the pitot tube.
The one instrument that utilizes the pitot tube is the ASI. The
total pressure is transmitted to the ASI from the pitot tube’s
pressure chamber via a small tube. The static pressure is
also delivered to the opposite side of the ASI, which serves
to cancel out the two static pressures, thereby leaving the
dynamic pressure to be indicated on the instrument. When
the dynamic pressure changes, the ASI shows either increase
or decrease, corresponding to the direction of change. The
two remaining instruments (altimeter and VSI) utilize only
the static pressure that is derived from the static port.
Static Pressure Chamber and Lines
The static chamber is vented through small holes to the
free undisturbed air on the side(s) of the aircraft. As the
atmospheric pressure changes, the pressure is able to move
freely in and out of the instruments through the small lines
that connect the instruments to the static system. An alternate
static source is provided in some aircraft to provide static
pressure should the primary static source become blocked.
The alternate static source is normally found inside the flight

Figure 8-2. Altimeter.
Aneroid wafers
Static port
100 ft. pointer
A crosshatched area appears on
some altimeters when displaying
an altitude below 10,000 feet MSL.
Crosshatch flag
Barometric scale adjustment knob
10,000 ft. pointer
1,000 ft. pointer
Altimeter setting window
deck. Due to the venturi effect of the air flowing around the
fuselage, the air pressure inside the flight deck is lower than
the exterior pressure.
When the alternate static source pressure is used, the
following instrument indications are observed:
1. 	 The altimeter indicates a slightly higher altitude than
actual.
2. 	 The ASI indicates an airspeed greater than the actual
airspeed.
3. 	 The VSI shows a momentary climb and then stabilizes
if the altitude is held constant.
Each pilot is responsible for consulting the Aircraft Flight
Manual (AFM) or the Pilot’s Operating Handbook (POH)
to determine the amount of error that is introduced into the
system when utilizing the alternate static source. In an aircraft
not equipped with an alternate static source, an alternate
method of introducing static pressure into the system should
a blockage occur is to break the glass face of the VSI. This
most likely renders the VSI inoperative. The reason for
choosing the VSI as the instrument to break is that it is the
least important static source instrument for flight.
Altimeter
The altimeter is an instrument that measures the height of
an aircraft above a given pressure level. Pressure levels
are discussed later in detail. Since the altimeter is the only
instrument that is capable of indicating altitude, this is one of
the most vital instruments installed in the aircraft. To use the
altimeter effectively, the pilot must understand the operation
of the instrument, as well as the errors associated with the
altimeter and how each affect the indication.
A stack of sealed aneroid wafers comprise the main
component of the altimeter. An aneroid wafer is a sealed
wafer that is evacuated to an internal pressure of 29.92
inches of mercury ("Hg). These wafers are free to expand
and contract with changes to the static pressure. A higher
static pressure presses down on the wafers and causes them
to collapse. A lower static pressure (less than 29.92 "Hg)
allows the wafers to expand. A mechanical linkage connects
the wafer movement to the needles on the indicator face,
which translates compression of the wafers into a decrease
in altitude and translates an expansion of the wafers into an
increase in altitude. [Figure 8-2]
Notice how the static pressure is introduced into the rear of the
sealed altimeter case. The altimeter’s outer chamber is sealed,
which allows the static pressure to surround the aneroid
wafers. If the static pressure is higher than the pressure in the
aneroid wafers (29.92 "Hg), then the wafers are compressed
until the pressure inside the wafers is equal to the surrounding
static pressure. Conversely, if the static pressure is less than
the pressure inside of the wafers, the wafers are able to expand
which increases the volume. The expansion and contraction
of the wafers moves the mechanical linkage which drives the
needles on the face of the altimeter.
Principle of Operation
The pressure altimeter is an aneroid barometer that measures
the pressure of the atmosphere at the level where the altimeter is
located and presents an altitude indication in feet. The altimeter
uses static pressure as its source of operation. Air is denser
at sea level than aloft—as altitude increases, atmospheric
pressure decreases. This difference in pressure at various levels
causes the altimeter to indicate changes in altitude.
The presentation of altitude varies considerably between
different types of altimeters. Some have one pointer while
others have two or more. Only the multipointer type is
discussed in this handbook. The dial of a typical altimeter
is graduated with numerals arranged clockwise from zero
to nine. Movement of the aneroid element is transmitted
through gears to the three hands that indicate altitude. In
Figure 8-2, the long, thin needle with the inverted triangle
at the end indicates tens of thousands of feet; the short, wide
needle indicates thousands of feet; and the long needle on
top indicates hundreds of feet.

Figure 8-3. Effects of nonstandard temperature on an altimeter.
5,000 foot pressure level
4,000 foot pressure level
3,000 foot pressure level
2,000 foot pressure level
1,000 foot pressure level
30°C
15°C
0°C
This indicated altitude is correct, however, only when the
sea level barometric pressure is standard (29.92 "Hg), the sea
level free air temperature is standard (+15 degrees Celsius
(°C) or 59 degrees Fahrenheit (°F)), and the pressure and
temperature decrease at a standard rate with an increase
in altitude. Adjustments for nonstandard pressures are
accomplished by setting the corrected pressure into a
barometric scale located on the face of the altimeter. The
barometric pressure window is sometimes referred to as
the Kollsman window; only after the altimeter is set does it
indicate the correct altitude. The word “correct” will need
to be better explained when referring to types of altitudes,
but is commonly used in this case to denote the approximate
altitude above sea level. In other words, the indicated
altitude refers to the altitude read off of the altitude which is
uncorrected, after the barometric pressure setting is dialed
into the Kollsman window. The additional types of altitudes
are further explained later.
Effect of Nonstandard Pressure and Temperature
It is easy to maintain a consistent height above ground if
the barometric pressure and temperature remain constant,
but this is rarely the case. The pressure and temperature can
change between takeoff and landing even on a local flight.
If these changes are not taken into consideration, flight
becomes dangerous.
If altimeters could not be adjusted for nonstandard pressure, a
hazardous situation could occur. For example, if an aircraft is
flown from a high pressure area to a low pressure area without
adjusting the altimeter, a constant altitude will be displayed,
but the actual height of the aircraft above the ground would
be lower then the indicated altitude. There is an old aviation
axiom: “GOING FROM A HIGH TO A LOW, LOOK OUT
BELOW.” Conversely, if an aircraft is flown from a low
pressure area to a high pressure area without an adjustment
of the altimeter, the actual altitude of the aircraft is higher
than the indicated altitude. Once in flight, it is important to
frequently obtain current altimeter settings en route to ensure
terrain and obstruction clearance.
Many altimeters do not have an accurate means of being
adjusted for barometric pressures in excess of 31.00
"Hg. When the altimeter cannot be set to the higher
pressure setting, the aircraft actual altitude is higher than
the altimeter indicates. When low barometric pressure
conditions occur (below 28.00), flight operations by
aircraft unable to set the actual altimeter setting are
not recommended.
Adjustments to compensate for nonstandard pressure do
not compensate for nonstandard temperature. Since cold
air is denser than warm air, when operating in temperatures
that are colder than standard, the altitude is lower than the
altimeter indication. [Figure 8-3] It is the magnitude of this
“difference” that determines the magnitude of the error. It is
the difference due to colder temperatures that concerns the
pilot. When flying into a cooler air mass while maintaining a
constant indicated altitude, true altitude is lower. If terrain or
obstacle clearance is a factor in selecting a cruising altitude,
particularly in mountainous terrain, remember to anticipate
that a colder-than-standard temperature places the aircraft
lower than the altimeter indicates. Therefore, a higher
indicated altitude may be required to provide adequate terrain
clearance. A variation of the memory aid used for pressure

Figure 8-4. Look at the chart using a temperature of –10 °C and
an aircraft altitude of 1,000 feet above the airport elevation. The
chart shows that the reported current altimeter setting may place
the aircraft as much as 100 feet below the altitude indicated by
the altimeter.
Height Above Airport in Feet
+10
-10
-20
-30
-40
-50
1,190
1,210
1,500
Reported
Temp 0 °C
1,500
can be employed: “FROM HOT TO COLD, LOOK OUT
BELOW.” When the air is warmer than standard, the aircraft
is higher than the altimeter indicates. Altitude corrections for
temperature can be computed on the navigation computer.
Extremely cold temperatures also affect altimeter indications.
Figure 8-4, which was derived from ICAO formulas,
indicates how much error can exist when the temperature is
extremely cold.
Setting the Altimeter
Most altimeters are equipped with a barometric pressure
setting window (or Kollsman window) providing a means
to adjust the altimeter. A knob is located at the bottom of the
instrument for this adjustment.
To adjust the altimeter for variation in atmospheric pressure,
the pressure scale in the altimeter setting window, calibrated
in inches of mercury ("Hg) and/or millibars (mb), is adjusted
to match the given altimeter setting. Altimeter setting is
defined as station pressure reduced to sea level, but an
altimeter setting is accurate only in the vicinity of the
reporting station. Therefore, the altimeter must be adjusted as
the flight progresses from one station to the next. Air traffic
control (ATC) will advise when updated altimeter settings
are available. If a pilot is not utilizing ATC assistance,
local altimeter settings can be obtained by monitoring local
automated weather observing system/automated surface
observation system (AWOS/ASOS) or automatic terminal
information service (ATIS) broadcasts.
Many pilots confidently expect the current altimeter setting
will compensate for irregularities in atmospheric pressure at
all altitudes, but this is not always true. The altimeter setting
broadcast by ground stations is the station pressure corrected
to mean sea level. It does not account for the irregularities
at higher levels, particularly the effect of nonstandard
temperature. If each pilot in a given area is using the same
altimeter setting, each altimeter should be equally affected
by temperature and pressure variation errors, making it
possible to maintain the desired vertical separation between
aircraft. This does not guarantee vertical separation though.
It is still imperative to maintain a regimented visual scan for
intruding air traffic.
When flying over high, mountainous terrain, certain
atmospheric conditions cause the altimeter to indicate an
altitude of 1,000 feet or more higher than the actual altitude.
For this reason, a generous margin of altitude should be
allowed—not only for possible altimeter error, but also for
possible downdrafts that might be associated with high winds.
To illustrate the use of the altimeter setting system, follow a
flight from Dallas Love Field, Texas, to Abilene Municipal
Airport, Texas, via Mineral Wells. Before taking off from
Love Field, the pilot receives a current altimeter setting of
29.85 "Hg from the control tower or ATIS and sets this value
in the altimeter setting window. The altimeter indication
should then be compared with the known airport elevation of
487 feet. Since most altimeters are not perfectly calibrated,
an error may exist.
When over Mineral Wells, assume the pilot receives a current
altimeter setting of 29.94 "Hg and sets this in the altimeter
window. Before entering the traffic pattern at Abilene
Municipal Airport, a new altimeter setting of 29.69 "Hg
is received from the Abilene Control Tower and set in
the altimeter setting window. If the pilot desires to fly the
traffic pattern at approximately 800 feet above the terrain,
and the field elevation of Abilene is 1,791 feet, an indicated
altitude of 2,600 feet should be maintained (1,791 feet +
800 feet = 2,591 feet, rounded to 2,600 feet).
The importance of properly setting the altimeter cannot
be overemphasized. Assume the pilot did not adjust the
altimeter at Abilene to the current setting and continued using
the Mineral Wells setting of 29.94 "Hg. When entering the
Abilene traffic pattern at an indicated altitude of 2,600 feet,
the aircraft would be approximately 250 feet below the proper
traffic pattern altitude. Upon landing, the altimeter would
indicate approximately 250 feet higher than the field elevation.

Mineral Wells altimeter setting
29.94

Abilene altimeter setting

29.69

Difference

0.25
(Since 1 inch of pressure is equal to approximately 1,000 feet
of altitude, 0.25 × 1,000 feet = 250 feet.)

When determining whether to add or subtract the amount of
altimeter error, remember that when the actual pressure is lower
than what is set in the altimeter window, the actual altitude
of the aircraft is lower than what is indicated on the altimeter.
The following is another method of computing the altitude
deviation. Start by subtracting the current altimeter setting
from 29.94 "Hg. Always remember to place the original setting
as the top number. Then subtract the current altimeter setting.

Mineral Wells altimeter setting
29.94

Abilene altimeter setting

29.69

29.94 – 29.69 = Difference
  0.25
(Since 1 inch of pressure is equal to approximately 1,000 feet
of altitude, 0.25 × 1,000 feet = 250 feet.) Always subtract
the number from the indicated altitude.

2,600 – 250 = 2,350
Now, try a lower pressure setting. Adjust from altimeter
setting 29.94 to 30.56 "Hg.

Mineral Wells altimeter setting
29.94

Altimeter setting

30.56

29.94 – 30.56 = Difference
–0.62
(Since 1 inch of pressure is equal to approximately 1,000 feet
of altitude, 0.62 × 1,000 feet = 620 feet.) Always subtract
the number from the indicated altitude.

2,600 – (–620) = 3,220
The pilot will be 620 feet high.
Notice the difference is a negative number. Starting with the
current indicated altitude of 2,600 feet, subtracting a negative
number is the same as adding the two numbers. By utilizing
this method, a pilot will better understand the importance of
using the current altimeter setting (miscalculation of where
and in what direction an error lies can affect safety; if altitude
is lower than indicated altitude, an aircraft could be in danger
of colliding with an obstacle).
Altimeter Operation
There are two means by which the altimeter pointers can
be moved. The first is a change in air pressure, while the
other is an adjustment to the barometric scale. When the
aircraft climbs or descends, changing pressure within the
altimeter case expands or contracts the aneroid barometer.
This movement is transmitted through mechanical linkage
to rotate the pointers.
A decrease in pressure causes the altimeter to indicate an
increase in altitude, and an increase in pressure causes the
altimeter to indicate a decrease in altitude. Accordingly, if
the aircraft is sitting on the ground with a pressure level of
29.98 "Hg and the pressure level changes to 29.68 "Hg, the
altimeter would show an increase of approximately 300 feet
in altitude. This pressure change is most noticeable when the
aircraft is left parked over night. As the pressure falls, the
altimeter interprets this as a climb. The altimeter indicates
an altitude above the actual field elevation. If the barometric
pressure setting is reset to the current altimeter setting of 29.68
"Hg, then the field elevation is again indicated on the altimeter.
This pressure change is not as easily noticed in flight since
aircraft fly at specific altitudes. The aircraft steadily decreases
true altitude while the altimeter is held constant through pilot
action as discussed in the previous section.
Knowing the aircraft’s altitude is vitally important to a
pilot. The pilot must be sure that the aircraft is flying high
enough to clear the highest terrain or obstruction along the
intended route. It is especially important to have accurate
altitude information when visibility is restricted. To clear
obstructions, the pilot must constantly be aware of the altitude
of the aircraft and the elevation of the surrounding terrain. To
reduce the possibility of a midair collision, it is essential to
maintain altitude in accordance with air traffic rules.
Types of Altitude
Altitude in itself is a relevant term only when it is specifically
stated to which type of altitude a pilot is referring. Normally
when the term “altitude” is used, it is referring to altitude
above sea level since this is the altitude which is used to
depict obstacles and airspace, as well as to separate air traffic.
Altitude is vertical distance above some point or level used as
a reference. There are as many kinds of altitude as there are
reference levels from which altitude is measured, and each
may be used for specific reasons. Pilots are mainly concerned
with five types of altitudes:
1. 	 Indicated altitude—read directly from the altimeter
(uncorrected) when it is set to the current altimeter
setting.
2. 	 True altitude—the vertical distance of the aircraft
above sea level—the actual altitude. It is often
expressed as feet above mean sea level (MSL). Airport,
terrain, and obstacle elevations on aeronautical charts
are true altitudes.

Figure 8-5. Vertical speed indicator (VSI).
VERTICAL SPEED
THOUSAND FT PER MIN
OWN
Diaphragm
Direct static pressure
Calibrated leak
3. 	 Absolute altitude—the vertical distance of an aircraft
above the terrain, or above ground level (AGL).
4. 	 Pressure altitude—the altitude indicated when
the altimeter setting window (barometric scale) is
adjusted to 29.92 "Hg. This is the altitude above
the standard datum plane, which is a theoretical
plane where air pressure (corrected to 15 °C) equals
29.92 "Hg. Pressure altitude is used to compute density
altitude, true altitude, true airspeed (TAS), and other
performance data.
5. 	 Density altitude—pressure altitude corrected
for variations from standard temperature. When
conditions are standard, pressure altitude and density
altitude are the same. If the temperature is above
standard, the density altitude is higher than pressure
altitude. If the temperature is below standard, the
density altitude is lower than pressure altitude. This
is an important altitude because it is directly related
to the aircraft’s performance.
A pilot must understand how the performance of the aircraft
is directly related to the density of the air. The density of
the air affects how much power a naturally aspirated engine
produces, as well as how efficient the airfoils are. If there are
fewer air molecules (lower pressure) to accelerate through
the propeller, the acceleration to rotation speed is longer
and thus produces a longer takeoff roll, which translates to
a decrease in performance.
As an example, consider an airport with a field elevation
of 5,048 feet MSL where the standard temperature is 5 °C.
Under these conditions, pressure altitude and density altitude
are the same—5,048 feet. If the temperature changes to
30 °C, the density altitude increases to 7,855 feet. This
means an aircraft would perform on takeoff as though the
field elevation were 7,855 feet at standard temperature.
Conversely, a temperature of –25 °C would result in a density
altitude of 1,232 feet. An aircraft would perform much better
under these conditions.
Instrument Check
Prior to each flight, a pilot should examine the altimeter for
proper indications in order to verify its validity. To determine
the condition of an altimeter, set the barometric scale to the
current reported altimeter setting transmitted by the local
airport traffic control tower, flight service station (FSS), or
any other reliable source, such as ATIS, AWOS, or ASOS.
The altimeter pointers should indicate the surveyed field
elevation of the airport. If the indication is off more than
75 feet from the surveyed field elevation, the instrument
should be referred to a certificated instrument repair station
for recalibration.
Vertical Speed Indicator (VSI)
The VSI, which is sometimes called a vertical velocity
indicator (VVI), indicates whether the aircraft is climbing,
descending, or in level flight. The rate of climb or descent is
indicated in feet per minute (fpm). If properly calibrated, the
VSI indicates zero in level flight. [Figure 8-5]
Principle of Operation
Although the VSI operates solely from static pressure, it is a
differential pressure instrument. It contains a diaphragm with
connecting linkage and gearing to the indicator pointer inside
an airtight case. The inside of the diaphragm is connected
directly to the static line of the pitot-static system. The area
outside the diaphragm, which is inside the instrument case,
is also connected to the static line but through a restricted
orifice (calibrated leak).
Both the diaphragm and the case receive air from the static
line at existing atmospheric pressure. The diaphragm receives
unrestricted air, while the case receives the static pressure via
the metered leak. When the aircraft is on the ground or in level
flight, the pressures inside the diaphragm and the instrument
case are equal, and the pointer is at the zero indication.
When the aircraft climbs or descends, the pressure inside
the diaphragm changes immediately, but due to the metering
action of the restricted passage, the case pressure remains
higher or lower for a short time, causing the diaphragm to
contract or expand. This causes a pressure differential that
is indicated on the instrument needle as a climb or descent.
When the pressure differential stabilizes at a definite ratio,
the needle indicates the rate of altitude change.

Figure 8-6. An IVSI incorporates accelerometers to help the
instrument immediately indicate changes in vertical speed.
UP
DOWN
.5
.5
Accelerometer
Inlet from static port
Calibrated leak
Figure 8-7. Airspeed indicator (ASI).
Diaphragm
Handstaff pinion
Static air line
Pitot tube
Ram air
Sector
Long lever
Pitot connection
The VSI displays two different types of information:
Trend information shows an immediate indication of
an increase or decrease in the aircraft’s rate of climb
or descent.
Rate information shows a stabilized rate of change in
altitude.
The trend information is the direction of movement of the
VSI needle. For example, if an aircraft is maintaining level
flight and the pilot pulls back on the control yoke causing the
nose of the aircraft to pitch up, the VSI needle moves upward
to indicate a climb. If the pitch attitude is held constant,
the needle stabilizes after a short period (6–9 seconds) and
indicates the rate of climb in hundreds of fpm. The time
period from the initial change in the rate of climb, until the
VSI displays an accurate indication of the new rate, is called
the lag. Rough control technique and turbulence can extend
the lag period and cause erratic and unstable rate indications.
Some aircraft are equipped with an instantaneous vertical
speed indicator (IVSI), which incorporates accelerometers
to compensate for the lag in the typical VSI. [Figure 8-6]
Instrument Check
As part of a preflight check, proper operation of the VSI
must be established. Make sure the VSI indicates a near zero
reading prior to leaving the ramp area and again just before
takeoff. If the VSI indicates anything other than zero, that
indication can be referenced as the zero mark. Normally, if the
needle is not exactly zero, it is only slightly above or below
the zero line. After takeoff, the VSI should trend upward to
indicate a positive rate of climb and then, once a stabilized
climb is established, a rate of climb can be referenced.
Airspeed Indicator (ASI)
The ASI is a sensitive, differential pressure gauge that
measures and promptly indicates the difference between pitot
(impact/dynamic pressure) and static pressure. These two
pressures are equal when the aircraft is parked on the ground
in calm air. When the aircraft moves through the air, the
pressure on the pitot line becomes greater than the pressure
in the static lines. This difference in pressure is registered by
the airspeed pointer on the face of the instrument, which is
calibrated in miles per hour, knots (nautical miles per hour),
or both. [Figure 8-7]
The ASI is the one instrument that utilizes both the pitot,
as well as the static system. The ASI introduces the static
pressure into the airspeed case while the pitot pressure
(dynamic) is introduced into the diaphragm. The dynamic
pressure expands or contracts one side of the diaphragm,
which is attached to an indicating system. The system drives
the mechanical linkage and the airspeed needle.
Just as in altitudes, there are multiple types of airspeeds.
Pilots need to be very familiar with each type.
Indicated airspeed (IAS)—the direct instrument
reading obtained from the ASI, uncorrected for
variations in atmospheric density, installation error,
or instrument error. Manufacturers use this airspeed
as the basis for determining aircraft performance.
Takeoff, landing, and stall speeds listed in the AFM/
POH are IAS and do not normally vary with altitude
or temperature.

Figure 8-8. Single engine airspeed indicator (ASI).
T.A.S.
KTS
PRESS
ALT

F°

-
MPH
MPH
AIRSPEED
KNOTS
VS0
VNE (red line)
Yellow arc
VN0
Green arc
VFE
White arc
VS1
Calibrated airspeed (CAS)—IAS corrected for
installation error and instrument error. Although
manufacturers attempt to keep airspeed errors to a
minimum, it is not possible to eliminate all errors
throughout the airspeed operating range. At certain
airspeeds and with certain flap settings, the installation
and instrument errors may total several knots. This
error is generally greatest at low airspeeds. In the
cruising and higher airspeed ranges, IAS and CAS
are approximately the same. Refer to the airspeed
calibration chart to correct for possible airspeed errors.
True airspeed (TAS)—CAS corrected for altitude
and nonstandard temperature. Because air density
decreases with an increase in altitude, an aircraft has
to be flown faster at higher altitudes to cause the same
pressure difference between pitot impact pressure
and static pressure. Therefore, for a given CAS, TAS
increases as altitude increases; or for a given TAS,
CAS decreases as altitude increases. A pilot can find
TAS by two methods. The most accurate method is
to use a flight computer. With this method, the CAS
is corrected for temperature and pressure variation by
using the airspeed correction scale on the computer.
Extremely accurate electronic flight computers are
also available. Just enter the CAS, pressure altitude,
and temperature, and the computer calculates the TAS.
A second method, which is a rule of thumb, provides
the approximate TAS. Simply add 2 percent to the
CAS for each 1,000 feet of altitude. The TAS is the
speed that is used for flight planning and is used when
filing a flight plan.
Groundspeed (GS)—the actual speed of the airplane
over the ground. It is TAS adjusted for wind. GS
decreases with a headwind and increases with a
tailwind.
Airspeed Indicator Markings
Aircraft weighing 12,500 pounds or less, manufactured after
1945, and certificated by the FAA are required to have ASIs
marked in accordance with a standard color-coded marking
system. This system of color-coded markings enables a pilot
to determine at a glance certain airspeed limitations that are
important to the safe operation of the aircraft. For example, if
during the execution of a maneuver, it is noted that the airspeed
needle is in the yellow arc and rapidly approaching the red
line, the immediate reaction should be to reduce airspeed.
As shown in Figure 8-8, ASIs on single-engine small aircraft
include the following standard color-coded markings:
White arc—commonly referred to as the flap operating
range since its lower limit represents the full flap stall
speed and its upper limit provides the maximum flap
speed. Approaches and landings are usually flown at
speeds within the white arc.
Lower limit of white arc (VS0)—the stalling speed
or the minimum steady flight speed in the landing
configuration. In small aircraft, this is the power-off
stall speed at the maximum landing weight in the
landing configuration (gear and flaps down).
Upper limit of the white arc (VFE)—the maximum
speed with the flaps extended.
Green arc—the normal operating range of the aircraft.
Most flying occurs within this range.
Lower limit of green arc (VS1)—the stalling speed
or the minimum steady flight speed obtained in a
specified configuration. For most aircraft, this is the
power-off stall speed at the maximum takeoff weight
in the clean configuration (gear up, if retractable, and
flaps up).
Upper limit of green arc (VN0)—the maximum
structural cruising speed. Do not exceed this speed
except in smooth air.
Yellow arc—caution range. Fly within this range only
in smooth air and then only with caution.
Red line (VNE)—never exceed speed. Operating above
this speed is prohibited since it may result in damage
or structural failure.
Other Airspeed Limitations
Some important airspeed limitations are not marked on the
face of the ASI, but are found on placards and in the AFM/
POH. These airspeeds include:

Figure 8-9. A blocked pitot tube, but clear drain hole.
Static port
Drain hole
Pitot tube
Blockage
Design maneuvering speed (VA)—the maximum
speed at which the structural design’s limit load can
be imposed (either by gusts or full deflection of the
control surfaces) without causing structural damage.
It is important to consider weight when referencing
this speed. For example, VA may be 100 knots when
an airplane is heavily loaded, but only 90 knots when
the load is light.
Landing gear operating speed (VLO)—the maximum
speed for extending or retracting the landing gear if
flying an aircraft with retractable landing gear.
Landing gear extended speed (VLE)—the maximum
speed at which an aircraft can be safely flown with
the landing gear extended.
Best angle-of-climb speed (VX)—the airspeed at
which an aircraft gains the greatest amount of altitude
in a given distance. It is used during a short-field
takeoff to clear an obstacle.
Best rate-of-climb speed (VY)—the airspeed that
provides the most altitude gain in a given period of time.
Single-engine best rate-of-climb (VYSE)—the best
rate-of-climb or minimum rate-of-sink in a light
twin-engine aircraft with one engine inoperative. It is
marked on the ASI with a blue line. VYSE is commonly
referred to as “Blue Line.”
Minimum control speed (VMC)—the minimum flight
speed at which a light, twin-engine aircraft can be
satisfactorily controlled when an engine suddenly
becomes inoperative and the remaining engine is at
takeoff power.
Instrument Check
Prior to takeoff, the ASI should read zero. However, if there
is a strong wind blowing directly into the pitot tube, the ASI
may read higher than zero. When beginning the takeoff,
make sure the airspeed is increasing at an appropriate rate.
Blockage of the Pitot-Static System
Errors almost always indicate blockage of the pitot tube, the
static port(s), or both. Blockage may be caused by moisture
(including ice), dirt, or even insects. During preflight, make
sure the pitot tube cover is removed. Then, check the pitot and
static port openings. A blocked pitot tube affects the accuracy
of the ASI, but a blockage of the static port not only affects
the ASI, but also causes errors in the altimeter and VSI.
Blocked Pitot System
The pitot system can become blocked completely or only
partially if the pitot tube drain hole remains open. If the pitot
tube becomes blocked and its associated drain hole remains
clear, ram air is no longer able to enter the pitot system. Air
already in the system vents through the drain hole, and the
remaining pressure drops to ambient (outside) air pressure.
Under these circumstances, the ASI reading decreases to
zero because the ASI senses no difference between ram and
static air pressure. The ASI no longer operates since dynamic
pressure cannot enter the pitot tube opening. Static pressure
is able to equalize on both sides since the pitot drain hole
is still open. The apparent loss of airspeed is not usually
instantaneous but happens very quickly. [Figure 8-9]
If both the pitot tube opening and the drain hole should
become clogged simultaneously, then the pressure in the pitot
tube is trapped. No change is noted on the airspeed indication
should the airspeed increase or decrease. If the static port
is unblocked and the aircraft should change altitude, then a
change is noted on the ASI. The change is not related to a
change in airspeed but a change in static pressure. The total
pressure in the pitot tube does not change due to the blockage;
however, the static pressure will change.
Because airspeed indications rely upon both static and
dynamic pressure together, the blockage of either of these
systems affects the ASI reading. Remember that the ASI has
a diaphragm in which dynamic air pressure is entered. Behind
this diaphragm is a reference pressure called static pressure
that comes from the static ports. The diaphragm pressurizes
against this static pressure and as a result changes the airspeed
indication via levers and indicators. [Figure 8-10]
For example, take an aircraft and slow it down to zero knots
at a given altitude. If the static port (providing static pressure)
and the pitot tube (providing dynamic pressure) are both
unobstructed, the following claims can be made:
1. 	 The ASI would be zero.
2. 	 Dynamic pressure and static pressure are equal.
3. 	 Because both dynamic and static air pressure are equal
at zero speed with increased speed, dynamic pressure

Figure 8-10. Blocked pitot system with clear static system.
Climb
Descent
Static port
Drain hole
Pitot tube
Blockage
must include two components: static pressure and
dynamic pressure.
It can be inferred that airspeed indication must be based upon
a relationship between these two pressures, and indeed it is.
An ASI uses the static pressure as a reference pressure and
as a result, the ASI’s case is kept at this pressure behind the
diaphragm. On the other hand, the dynamic pressure through
the pitot tube is connected to a highly sensitive diaphragm
within the ASI case. Because an aircraft in zero motion
(regardless of altitude) results in a zero airspeed, the pitot tube
always provides static pressure in addition to dynamic pressure.
Therefore, the airspeed indication is the result of two
pressures: the pitot tube static and dynamic pressure within
the diaphragm as measured against the static pressure in the
ASI’s case.
If the aircraft were to descend while the pitot tube is
obstructed, the pressure in the pitot system, including the
diaphragm, would remain constant. But as the descent
is made, the static pressure would increase against the
diaphragm causing it to compress, thereby resulting in an
indication of decreased airspeed. Conversely, if the aircraft
were to climb, the static pressure would decrease allowing
the diaphragm to expand, thereby showing an indication of
greater airspeed. [Figure 8-10]
The pitot tube may become blocked during flight due to
visible moisture. Some aircraft may be equipped with pitot
heat for flight in visible moisture. Consult the AFM/POH for
specific procedures regarding the use of pitot heat.
Blocked Static System
If the static system becomes blocked but the pitot tube
remains clear, the ASI continues to operate; however, it
is inaccurate. The airspeed indicates lower than the actual
airspeed when the aircraft is operated above the altitude
where the static ports became blocked because the trapped
static pressure is higher than normal for that altitude. When
operating at a lower altitude, a faster than actual airspeed is
displayed due to the relatively low static pressure trapped
in the system.
Revisiting the ratios that were used to explain a blocked pitot
tube, the same principle applies for a blocked static port. If
the aircraft descends, the static pressure increases on the pitot
side showing an increase on the ASI. This assumes that the
aircraft does not actually increase its speed. The increase in
static pressure on the pitot side is equivalent to an increase
in dynamic pressure since the pressure cannot change on
the static side.
If an aircraft begins to climb after a static port becomes
blocked, the airspeed begins to show a decrease as the
aircraft continues to climb. This is due to the decrease in
static pressure on the pitot side, while the pressure on the
static side is held constant.
A blockage of the static system also affects the altimeter and
VSI. Trapped static pressure causes the altimeter to freeze
at the altitude where the blockage occurred. In the case of
the VSI, a blocked static system produces a continuous zero
indication. [Figure 8-11]
Some aircraft are equipped with an alternate static source in
the flight deck. In the case of a blocked static source, opening
the alternate static source introduces static pressure from the
flight deck into the system. Flight deck static pressure is lower
than outside static pressure. Check the aircraft AOM/POH for
airspeed corrections when utilizing alternate static pressure.

Figure 8-12. Primary flight display (PFD). Note that the actual location of indications vary depending on manufacturers.
XPDR  5537  IDNT  LCL10:12:34
INSET
PFD
OBS
CDI
DME
XPDR
IDENT
TMR/REF
NRST
ALERTS
VOR 1

270°
TAS  106KT
OAT    6°C
NAV1 108.00  113.00
NAV2 108.00  110.60
134.000  118.000 COM1
123.800  118.000 COM2
WPT _ _ _ _ _ _ DIS _ _ ._ NM DTK _ _ _°T TRK 360°
Attitude indicator
Altimeter
Horizontal situation indicator
Vertical speed indicator (VSI)
Slip skid indicator
Airspeed indicator
Turn indicator
VOR 1

270°
270°
Slip/skid indicator
Turn rate indicator tick marks
Turn rate trend vector
Figure 8-11. Blocked static system.
30.0
29.9
29.8
Pitot tube
Blockage
Static port
Frozen altimeter
Constant zero indication on VSI
Inaccurate airspeed indications
Electronic Flight Display (EFD)
Advances in technology have brought about changes in the
instrumentation found in all types of aircraft; for example,
Electronic Flight Displays (EFDs) commonly referred to
as “glass cockpits.” EFDs include flight displays such as
primary flight displays (PFD) and multi-function displays
(MFD). This has changed not only what information is
available to a pilot, but also how the information is displayed.
In addition to the improvement in system reliability, which
increases overall safety, EFDs have decreased the overall cost
of equipping aircraft with state-of-the-art instrumentation.
Primary electronic instrumentation packages are less prone
to failure than their analogue counterparts. No longer is it
necessary for aircraft designers to create cluttered panel
layouts in order to accommodate all necessary flight
instruments. Instead, multi-panel digital flight displays
combine all flight instruments onto a single screen that is
called a primary flight display (PFD). The traditional “six
pack” of instruments is now displayed on one liquid crystal
display (LCD) screen.
Airspeed Tape
Configured similarly to traditional panel layouts, the ASI
is located on the left side of the screen and is displayed as
a vertical speed tape. As the aircraft increases in speed, the
larger numbers descend from the top of the tape. The TAS is
displayed at the bottom of the tape through the input to the air
data computer (ADC) from the outside air temperature probe.
Airspeed markings for VX, VY, and rotation speed (VR) are
displayed for pilot reference. An additional pilot-controlled
airspeed bug is available to set at any desired reference speed.
As on traditional analogue ASIs, the electronic airspeed tape
displays the color-coded ranges for the flap operating range,

Figure 8-13. Multi-function display (MFD).
normal range, and caution range. [Figure 8-12] The number
value changes color to red when the airspeed exceeds VNE to
warn the pilot of exceeding the maximum speed limitation.
Attitude Indicator
One improvement over analogue instrumentation is the
larger attitude indicator on EFD. The artificial horizon spans
the entire width of the PFD. [Figure 8-12] This expanded
instrumentation offers better reference through all phases of
flight and all flight maneuvers. The attitude indicator receives
its information from the Attitude Heading and Reference
System (AHRS).
Altimeter
The altimeter is located on the right side of the PFD.
[Figure 8-12] As the altitude increases, the larger numbers
descend from the top of the display tape, with the current
altitude being displayed in the black box in the center of the
display tape. The altitude is displayed in increments of 20 feet.
Vertical Speed Indicator (VSI)
The VSI is displayed to the right of the altimeter tape and can
take the form of an arced indicator or a vertical speed tape.
[Figure 8-12] Both are equipped with a vertical speed bug.
Heading Indicator
The heading indicator is located below the artificial horizon
and is normally modeled after a Horizontal Situation
Indicator (HSI). [Figure 8-12] As in the case of the attitude
indicator, the heading indicator receives its information from
the magnetometer, which feeds information to the AHRS unit
and then out to the PFD.
Turn Indicator
The turn indicator takes a slightly different form than the
traditional instrumentation. A sliding bar moves left and right
below the triangle to indicate deflection from coordinated
flight. [Figure 8-12] Reference for coordinated flight comes
from accelerometers contained in the AHRS unit.
Tachometer
The sixth instrument normally associated with the “six pack”
package is the tachometer. This is the only instrument that is
not located on the PFD. The tachometer is normally located
on the multi-function display (MFD). In the event of a display
screen failure, it is displayed on the remaining screen with
the PFD flight instrumentation. [Figure 8-13]
Slip/Skid Indicator
The slip/skid indicator is the horizontal line below the roll
pointer. [Figure 8-12] Like a ball in a turn-and-slip indicator,
a bar width off center is equal to one ball width displacement.
Turn Rate Indicator
The turn rate indicator, illustrated in Figure 8-12, is typically
found directly above the rotating compass card. Tick marks to
the left and right of the lubber line denote the turn (standardrate versus half standard-rate). Typically denoted by a trend
line, if the trend vector is extended to the second tick mark
the aircraft is in a standard-rate turn.
Individual panel displays can be configured for a variety
of aircraft by installing different software packages.
[Figure 8-14] Manufacturers are also able to upgrade existing
instrument displays in a similar manner, eliminating the need
to replace individual gauges in order to upgrade.

Figure 8-15. Teledyne’s 90004 TAS/Plus Air Data Computer (ADC)
computes air data information from the pitot-static pneumatic
system, aircraft temperature probe, and barometric correction
device to help create a clear picture of flight characteristics.
Figure 8-16. Airspeed trend vector.
TAS  120KT
Airspeed trend vector
Figure 8-14. Chelton’s FlightLogic (top) and Avidyne’s Entegra
(bottom) are examples of panel displays that are configurable.

30.30
UY
UX
VS
IFR APPR
00:03:29
2320B
ANG
239 A
MA239  5800’
239 2.3NM
Air Data Computer (ADC)
EFDs utilize the same type of instrument inputs as traditional
analogue gauges; however, the processing system is different.
The pitot static inputs are received by an ADC. The ADC
computes the difference between the total pressure and the
static pressure and generates the information necessary to
display the airspeed on the PFD. Outside air temperatures
are also monitored and introduced into various components
within the system, as well as being displayed on the PFD
screen. [Figure 8-15]
The ADC is a separate solid state device that, in addition to
providing data to the PFD, is capable of providing data to the
autopilot control system. In the event of system malfunction, the
ADC can quickly be removed and replaced in order to decrease
downtime and decrease maintenance turn-around times.
Altitude information is derived from the static pressure port
just as an analogue system does; however, the static pressure
does not enter a diaphragm. The ADC computes the received
barometric pressure and sends a digital signal to the PFD to
display the proper altitude readout. EFDs also show trend
vectors, which show the pilot how the altitude and airspeed
are progressing.
Trend Vectors
Trend vectors are magenta lines that move up and down both
the ASI and the altimeter. [Figures 8-16 and 8-17] The ADC
computes the rate of change and displays the 6-second projection
of where the aircraft will be. Pilots can utilize the trend vectors
to better control the aircraft’s attitude. By including the trend
vectors in the instrument scan, pilots are able to precisely control
airspeed and altitude. Additional information can be obtained
by referencing the Instrument Flying Handbook or specific
avionics manufacturer’s training material.

Figure 8-17. Altimeter trend vector.
VOR 1

270°
-500
TAS  100KT
270°
-125
-250
-375
Altitude trend vector
Turn rate trend vector
Airspeed trend (increasing)
Figure 8-18. Regardless of the position of its base, a gyro tends to
remain rigid in space, with its axis of rotation pointed in a constant
direction.
Gyroscopic Flight Instruments
Several flight instruments utilize the properties of a gyroscope
for their operation. The most common instruments containing
gyroscopes are the turn coordinator, heading indicator, and
the attitude indicator. To understand how these instruments
operate requires knowledge of the instrument power systems,
gyroscopic principles, and the operating principles of each
instrument.
Gyroscopic Principles
Any spinning object exhibits gyroscopic properties. A wheel
or rotor designed and mounted to utilize these properties is
called a gyroscope. Two important design characteristics
of an instrument gyro are great weight for its size, or high
density, and rotation at high speed with low friction bearings.
There are two general types of mountings; the type used
depends upon which property of the gyro is utilized. A freely
or universally mounted gyroscope is free to rotate in any
direction about its center of gravity. Such a wheel is said to
have three planes of freedom. The wheel or rotor is free to
rotate in any plane in relation to the base and is balanced so
that, with the gyro wheel at rest, it remains in the position
in which it is placed. Restricted or semi-rigidly mounted
gyroscopes are those mounted so that one of the planes of
freedom is held fixed in relation to the base.
There are two fundamental properties of gyroscopic action:
rigidity in space and precession.
Rigidity in Space
Rigidity in space refers to the principle that a gyroscope
remains in a fixed position in the plane in which it is spinning.
An example of rigidity in space is that of a bicycle wheel. As
the bicycle wheels increase speed, they become more stable in
their plane of rotation. This is why a bicycle is unstable and
maneuverable at low speeds and stable and less maneuverable
at higher speeds.
By mounting this wheel, or gyroscope, on a set of gimbal
rings, the gyro is able to rotate freely in any direction. Thus,
if the gimbal rings are tilted, twisted, or otherwise moved,
the gyro remains in the plane in which it was originally
spinning. [Figure 8-18]
Precession
Precession is the tilting or turning of a gyro in response to a
deflective force. The reaction to this force does not occur at
the point at which it was applied; rather, it occurs at a point
that is 90° later in the direction of rotation. This principle
allows the gyro to determine a rate of turn by sensing the
amount of pressure created by a change in direction. The rate
at which the gyro precesses is inversely proportional to the
speed of the rotor and proportional to the deflective force.
Using the example of the bicycle, precession acts on the
wheels in order to allow the bicycle to turn. While riding
at normal speed, it is not necessary to turn the handle bars
in the direction of the desired turn. A rider simply leans in
the direction that he or she wishes to go. Since the wheels
are rotating in a clockwise direction when viewed from the
right side of the bicycle, if a rider leans to the left, a force is
applied to the top of the wheel to the left. The force actually
acts 90° in the direction of rotation, which has the effect of
applying a force to the front of the tire, causing the bicycle

Figure 8-19. Precession of a gyroscope resulting from an applied
deflective force.
Plane of Precession
Plane of Force
Plane of Rotation
FORCE
to move to the left. There is a need to turn the handlebars at
low speeds because of the instability of the slowly turning
gyros and also to increase the rate of turn.
Precession can also create some minor errors in some
instruments. [Figure 8-19] Precession can cause a freely
spinning gyro to become displaced from its intended plane
of rotation through bearing friction, etc. Certain instruments
may require corrective realignment during flight, such as the
heading indicator.
Sources of Power
In some aircraft, all the gyros are vacuum, pressure, or
electrically operated. In other aircraft, vacuum or pressure
systems provide the power for the heading and attitude
indicators, while the electrical system provides the power for
the turn coordinator. Most aircraft have at least two sources
of power to ensure at least one source of bank information is
available if one power source fails. The vacuum or pressure
system spins the gyro by drawing a stream of air against the
rotor vanes to spin the rotor at high speed, much like the
operation of a waterwheel or turbine. The amount of vacuum
or pressure required for instrument operation varies, but is
usually between 4.5 "Hg and 5.5 "Hg.
One source of vacuum for the gyros is a vane-type enginedriven pump that is mounted on the accessory case of the
engine. Pump capacity varies in different aircraft, depending
on the number of gyros.
A typical vacuum system consists of an engine-driven
vacuum pump, relief valve, air filter, gauge, and tubing
necessary to complete the connections. The gauge is mounted
in the aircraft’s instrument panel and indicates the amount
of pressure in the system (vacuum is measured in inches of
mercury less than ambient pressure).
As shown in Figure 8-20, air is drawn into the vacuum
system by the engine-driven vacuum pump. It first goes
through a filter, which prevents foreign matter from entering
the vacuum or pressure system. The air then moves through
the attitude and heading indicators where it causes the gyros
to spin. A relief valve prevents the vacuum pressure, or
suction, from exceeding prescribed limits. After that, the air
is expelled overboard or used in other systems, such as for
inflating pneumatic deicing boots.
It is important to monitor vacuum pressure during flight,
because the attitude and heading indicators may not provide
reliable information when suction pressure is low. The
vacuum, or suction, gauge is generally marked to indicate
the normal range. Some aircraft are equipped with a warning
light that illuminates when the vacuum pressure drops below
the acceptable level.
When the vacuum pressure drops below the normal operating
range, the gyroscopic instruments may become unstable and
inaccurate. Cross-checking the instruments routinely is a
good habit to develop.
Turn Indicators
Aircraft use two types of turn indicators: turn-and-slip
indicators and turn coordinators. Because of the way the gyro
is mounted, the turn-and-slip indicator shows only the rate of
turn in degrees per second. The turn coordinator is mounted
at an angle, or canted, so it can initially show roll rate. When
the roll stabilizes, it indicates rate of turn. Both instruments
indicate turn direction and quality (coordination), and also
serve as a backup source of bank information in the event an
attitude indicator fails. Coordination is achieved by referring
to the inclinometer, which consists of a liquid-filled curved
tube with a ball inside. [Figure 8-21]
Turn-and-Slip Indicator
The gyro in the turn-and-slip indicator rotates in the vertical
plane corresponding to the aircraft’s longitudinal axis. A
single gimbal limits the planes in which the gyro can tilt,
and a spring works to maintain a center position. Because of
precession, a yawing force causes the gyro to tilt left or right,
as viewed from the pilot seat. The turn-and-slip indicator
uses a pointer, called the turn needle, to show the direction
and rate of turn. The turn-and-slip indicator is incapable of
“tumbling” off its rotational axis because of the restraining
springs. When extreme forces are applied to a gyro, the gyro
is displaced from its normal plane of rotation, rendering its
indications invalid. Certain instruments have specific pitch
and bank limits that induce a tumble of the gyro.

Figure 8-20. Typical vacuum system.
I0
SUCTION
INCHES         MERCURT
2I
I5
I2
20                     20
I0              I0
I0               I0
20                      20
TEST
STBY PWR
Vacuum relief valve
Vacuum air filter
Attitude indicator
Vacuum pump
Heading indicator
Overboard vent line
Suction
gauge
Figure 8-21. Turn indicators rely on controlled precession for their operation.
Turn coordinator
Turn-and-slip indicator
Gyro rotation
Standard rate turn index
Horizontal gyro
Inclinometer
Inclinometer
Gimbal rotation
Standard rate turn index
Gyro rotation
Gimbal rotation
Canted gyro
Gimbal
Turn Coordinator
The gimbal in the turn coordinator is canted; therefore, its
gyro can sense both rate of roll and rate of turn. Since turn
coordinators are more prevalent in training aircraft, this
discussion concentrates on that instrument. When rolling into
or out of a turn, the miniature aircraft banks in the direction
the aircraft is rolled. A rapid roll rate causes the miniature
aircraft to bank more steeply than a slow roll rate.
The turn coordinator can be used to establish and maintain
a standard-rate turn by aligning the wing of the miniature
aircraft with the turn index. Figure 8-22 shows a picture of a
turn coordinator. There are two marks on each side (left and
right) of the face of the instrument. The first mark is used to
reference a wings level zero rate of turn. The second mark
on the left and right side of the instrument serve to indicate
a standard rate of turn. A standard-rate turn is defined as a
turn rate of 3° per second. The turn coordinator indicates only
the rate and direction of turn; it does not display a specific
angle of bank.

I0              I
I0               I0
20                      2
TEST
BY PWR
0              I0
0               I0
Bank index
Horizon reference arm
Roll gimbal
Gimbal rotation
Gyro
Pitch gimbal
Figure 8-23. Attitude indicator.
Slipping turn
Skidding turn
Coordinated turn
TURN COORDINATOR
2  MIN.
D.C.
ELEC.
NO  PITCH
INFORMATION
TURN COORDINATOR
2  MIN.
D.C.
ELEC.
NO  PITCH
INFORMATION
TURN COORDINATOR
2  MIN.
D.C.
ELEC.
NO  PITCH
INFORMATION
Figure 8-22. If inadequate right rudder is applied in a right turn,
a slip results. Too much right rudder causes the aircraft to skid
through the turn. Centering the ball results in a coordinated turn.
Inclinometer
The inclinometer is used to depict aircraft yaw, which is
the side-to-side movement of the aircraft’s nose. During
coordinated, straight-and-level flight, the force of gravity
causes the ball to rest in the lowest part of the tube, centered
between the reference lines. Coordinated flight is maintained
by keeping the ball centered. If the ball is not centered, it can
be centered by using the rudder.
To center the ball, apply rudder pressure on the side to
which the ball is deflected. Use the simple rule, “step on the
ball,” to remember which rudder pedal to press. If aileron
and rudder are coordinated during a turn, the ball remains
centered in the tube. If aerodynamic forces are unbalanced,
the ball moves aw
