U.S. Department
of Transportation
Federal Aviation
Administration
Advisory
Circular
Subject: Nationally Scheduled,
FAA-Approved, Industry-Conducted
Flight Instructor Refresher Course
Date: 10/30/24 AC No: 61-83K
Initiated by: AFS-800 Change:
1 PURPOSE OF THIS ADVISORY CIRCULAR (AC). This AC provides guidance and
recommendations for the preparation and approval of training course outlines (TCO) for
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)-approved, industry-conducted flight instructor
refresher courses (FIRC) in accordance with Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations
(14 CFR) part 61, § 61.197(b)(2)(iii). In so doing, this AC clarifies TCO development
standards, training standards, and testing standards, and provides recommendations to
assist applicants to meet and adhere to these standards.
1.1 Advisory Material. The contents of this document do not have the force and effect of
law and are not meant to bind the public in any way. This document is intended only to
provide clarity to the public regarding existing requirements under the law or agency
policies.
1.2 Program Intent. The intent of the FIRC program is to keep flight instructors informed of
the changing world of General Aviation (GA) flight training and to enhance aviation
safety through continued up-to-date refresher training of the flight instructor cadre.
Attending a FIRC is one of several methods by which a flight instructor may establish
recent experience in accordance with § 61.197.
2 AUDIENCE. The primary audience for this AC is applicants seeking authorization to
become a FIRC provider and FIRC providers holding a current FAA authorization. The
secondary audience includes flight instructors, flight schools, and stakeholders supporting
flight instructor recurrent training.
Note: Effective August 4, 1997, the holder of a pilot school certificate issued
under 14 CFR part 141 may also obtain approval to provide a FIRC program
under the authority of part 141 appendix K, paragraph 11. Holders of a part 141
provisional pilot school or pilot school certificate that desire to offer a FIRC
program under their Air Agency Certificate should also refer to this AC as
guidance in developing a TCO for FAA approval (see paragraph 9.2).
3 WHERE YOU CAN FIND THIS AC. You can find this AC on the FAA’s website at
https://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/advisory_circulars and the Dynamic Regulatory
System (DRS) at https://drs.faa.gov.
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
2
4 WHAT THIS AC CANCELS. AC 61-83J, Nationally Scheduled, FAA-Approved,
Industry-Conducted Flight Instructor Refresher Course, dated September 13, 2018, is
canceled.
5 DEFINITIONS.
5.1 Airman Certification Representative (ACR). An ACR is an individual representing a
specific FIRC provider who is authorized under Title 49 of the United States Code
(49 U.S.C.) § 44702(d) to accept airmen applications from successful graduates of that
provider’s FIRC to validate flight instructor recent experience and to issue temporary
flight instructor certificates, if required. An ACR may also accept applications to reinstate
flight instructor privileges if 3 calendar months or less have passed since the last month
of the flight instructor's recent experience period, in accordance with § 61.199(a)(1) or
§ 61.427(a), as applicable.
5.2 Attendee/Instructor/Instructor Attendee/Ground Instructor. This AC uses all four
terms throughout, and each term is defined in one of two ways:
1. The terms “instructor attendee(s)” and “instructor(s)” are individuals attending the
FIRC to establish their flight instructor recent experience in accordance with
§ 61.197(b)(2)(iii), or reinstate flight instructor privileges in accordance with
§ 61.199(a)(1) or § 61.427(a), as applicable, if 3 calendar months or less have passed
since the last month of the flight instructor's recent experience period. Additionally, a
ground instructor or a part 141 chief instructor or assistant chief instructor are
individuals attending the FIRC to meet some other regulatory requirement, such as
meeting recent experience requirements.
2. The term “attendee(s)” includes instructor attendees, but it may also include any other
individual who is attending the FIRC to enrich personal knowledge and who will not
use the FIRC to meet any regulatory or policy requirement or will not interact with
the FAA as a result of attendance.
5.3 Course (or Course of Training). A course (or course of training) is a program of study
of a range of closely related topics leading to a single outcome. In this case, the outcome
is a graduation certificate that may serve as the basis for establishing recent flight
instructor experience or reinstatement of flight instructor privileges if 3 calendar months
or less have passed since the last month of the flight instructor's recent experience period.
5.4 Credential(s). In the context of this AC, credential(s) refers to the actual flight instructor
certificate issued by the FAA to a qualified flight or ground instructor.
5.5 Curriculum. A curriculum is an organized sequence of topics or subject matter presented
within a course of training.
5.6 Internet Curriculum/Web-Based Curriculum. These two terms are used
interchangeably and define a curriculum in which the study, completion, and testing for
all applicable course materials in a training syllabus are satisfactorily accomplished
through the internet.
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
3
5.7 Lesson. A lesson is an individual period of instruction that imparts subject matter to the
attendee(s). A single lesson generally covers a single topic.
5.8 Lesson Plan. A lesson plan is the instructor’s plan for teaching a given unit of learning.
A series of lesson plans are components of the training syllabus.
5.9 Module. A module generally means a unit of training that includes a single topic. The
term may also be used to mean a unit of training time (e.g., 1 hour) that may or may not
cover more than one topic. While the term will generally be limited in this AC to indicate
a single topic, the alternative usage will be acceptable in the provider’s documentation if
clearly defined as such.
5.10 Presenter. A presenter is the individual who is actually presenting FIRC training
material. The principal presenter can be the FIRC provider or an employee of the
approved FIRC provider responsible for presenting the FIRC material. Exceptions may
be made for expert guest presenters from government or industry who are invited by the
FIRC provider to present individual modules.
5.11 Provider. A provider is a holder of an FAA authorization to conduct FIRC programs
through meeting the requirements of § 61.197(b)(2)(iii). The terms FIRC, FIRC provider,
operator, organization, and provider are used interchangeably in this AC.
5.12 Sponsor. A sponsor is a business or association that recruits and promotes an authorized
FIRC provider to conduct its program to the sponsor’s members for the purpose of
providing continuing training to its member flight instructors and establishing their recent
flight instructor experience through meeting the requirements of § 61.197(b)(2)(iii).
5.13 Stage. A stage is a portion of the course consisting of a group of lessons, similar subject
matter, or a particular day of instruction (e.g., day 1, 2, or 3, versus stage 1, 2, or 3). A
FIRC provider may or may not employ stages at their discretion.
5.14 Student. A student is an individual who will receive training to develop aeronautical
knowledge and/or receive flight instruction from a flight instructor outside the venue of a
FIRC. This AC does not use this term to refer to a flight instructor attendee.
5.15 Training Course Outline (TCO). A TCO is an overview document that details the
content, methodology, and structure of a course of training.
5.16 Training Syllabus. A training syllabus is the structured listing and summary of all
individual lesson plans representing the sequence and timing of the material taught. A
training syllabus represents a kind of table of contents of the lesson plans and may be as
short as a single page. Wherever possible, the syllabus will be structured as a step-by-step
(building block) progression of learning with provisions for review, evaluation, and
testing at prescribed stages of learning, such as identifying the time and location in the
lesson sequence of each of the tests.
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
4
6 BACKGROUND.
6.1 Flight Instructor Refresher Program.
6.1.1 The FAA’s Flight Instructor Refresher Program was initiated in 1965 to provide
standardization in updating flight instructors. FAA Aeronautical Center (FAAAC)
instructors provided instruction until their participation terminated on October 1, 1977.
Since that date, the FAA transferred the authority and responsibility for the conduct of
the FIRC program to provide an authorized basis for renewal of a flight instructor
certificate to certain qualified industry organizations. The FAA made this transfer in an
agreement between industry and the FAA. These industry-conducted courses of training
provide one acceptable means whereby the holders of valid and current flight instructor
certificates may renew their flight instructor certificates.
6.1.2 On December 1, 2024, the FAA issued a final rule removing the expiration date from
flight instructor certificates. After this date, flight instructor certificates are issued
without an expiration date and flight instructors must meet recent experience
requirements in accordance with § 61.197. Successful completion of an approved FIRC
remains an acceptable means of establishing recent experience under this rule.
Additionally, the final rule expanded the role of the FIRC, allowing reinstatement of
flight instructor privileges by having the flight instructor successfully complete an
approved FIRC if 3 calendar months or less have passed since the last month of the flight
instructor's recent experience period in accordance with § 61.199(a)(1) or § 61.427(a) for
flight instructors with a sport pilot rating.
6.2 Program Attendance.
6.2.1 Attendance at these training programs provides qualified instructors an opportunity to
meet or maintain their qualifications as chief instructors or assistant chief instructors for
pilot schools certificated under part 141.
6.2.2 Attendance at these training programs provides non-instructor pilots and other interested
parties an opportunity to further their aeronautical knowledge.
6.2.3 Successful attendance at one of these training programs qualifies for the ground portion
of any level of the Pilot Proficiency Program (WINGS) for both flight instructors and
non-instructor pilots.
7 THE ROLE OF THE FIRC PROVIDER.
7.1 Role. The FIRC provider plays an extremely important role in maintaining the highest
levels of safety, professionalism, and in-depth expert aviation knowledge to help ensure a
continued enhancement of aviation safety.
7.2 Communication. The FIRC program reduces GA accidents by communicating pertinent
and up-to-date information to flight instructors through recurrent training.
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
5
7.2.1 Responsibility. The FIRC program ensures expert flight instructor knowledge through
consistent communication. FIRC providers:
1. Communicate current information that is essential to ensuring extensive and in-depth
flight instructor knowledge.
2. Provide training of pertinent developments and new information that occurred since
the attendee last established recent experience.
3. Have the responsibility to meet the recurrent training needs of their attendees.
Note: Flight instructors are professionals that should maintain the highest level of
aeronautical knowledge to do their job effectively. They carry out their
responsibilities (see paragraph 7.4) on the front lines, where they directly
influence the level of safety that exists throughout the GA community. Flight
instructors mentor pilot safety practices as they reduce aviation accidents by
providing pilot training, pilot evaluations, and by engaging in myriad other
pilot-related activities that influence the GA safety culture. Therefore, the
communication of current information to flight instructors is essential in ensuring
expert flight instructor knowledge.
7.2.2 Qualification. The FAA has determined that certain organizations or individuals are
qualified to act on behalf of the FAA in providing a basis upon which a flight instructor
may establish recent experience in accordance with § 61.197(b)(2)(iii) or reinstate flight
instructor privileges in accordance with § 61.199(a)(1) or § 61.427(a). All approved FIRC
providers together constitute a larger whole that, along with and interacting with the
FAA, share the common purpose of ensuring that flight instructors receive the most
up-to-date information through recurrent training. This is an important factor in
maintaining the highest levels of safety, professionalism, and expert knowledge to help
ensure a continued enhancement of aviation safety at all levels. Individual FIRC
providers should recognize that they are part of this larger whole and attempt to
communicate and share ideas and current information with other providers and with the
FAA on a regular basis.
7.3 Skill Building. The spirit of a FIRC should parallel that of the professional conference. A
live, in-person FIRC is a professional conference in every sense. Virtually all practicing
professionals regularly attend conferences and receive recurrent training to improve their
skill and ability to carry out their jobs more safely and efficiently. As professionals, flight
instructors demonstrated certain basic skills and knowledge when they received their
flight instructor credentials; thus, the FAA does not intend for a FIRC to rehash those
basics. The FAA expects a FIRC to expose its attendees to the latest in flight training
techniques, the newest technologies, and, most importantly, the latest operational safety
procedures. Emphasis in the FIRC should always be on the blend of aviation safety and
effective instruction; that is, it should be on developing and improving the instructor
skills necessary to efficiently convey information to pilots in training and to build within
them a foundational culture of safety.
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
6
7.4 Flight Instructor Responsibility. The only contact that many pilots may have with an
aviation authority is through their flight instructor. Flight instructors are professionals
who play a vital role in enhancing aviation safety. A flight instructor’s responsibilities
include effectively conveying critical information to pilots, effectively evaluating pilots’
proficiency, and effectively developing pilots’ skills to higher proficiency levels.
Consequently, flight instructors play a leading role in reducing the GA accident rate. The
FAA accorded serious responsibilities to flight instructors when the FAA issued their
instructor credentials. Incumbent upon these responsibilities is the requirement that they
stay knowledgeable and up to date on those issues critical to aviation safety. The FIRC
plays an important role in this regard.
7.5 Teaching Methodology. Any single FIRC program should, as much as is practical,
present a course of interrelated lessons that enhances the active flight instructor’s ability
to provide better training to GA pilots, rather than delivering a set of disconnected
subjects offered one after another with no obvious connection or purpose. The provider
should think of each topic as a chapter out of a larger book, with that “book” being the
entire 16-hour program. The FIRC provider should present the topics in appropriate
context. Always address the “why” of anything presented. Emphasize the concept of
scenarios. The FIRC provider should develop an innovative overall course that compels
and inspires its attendees.
7.5.1 An example of innovative thinking might be illustrated by developing a scenario with a
fictitious pilot for the attendees to follow as the fictitious pilot moves through each (or
some) of the course topics and experiences, learns, and reacts to each topic.
Note: For example, the FIRC provider could develop a scenario about Bob, the
flight instructor who, while instructing a student on how to use advanced avionics,
inadvertently flies into Special Use Airspace (SUA) because of excessive headsdown time in the cockpit while operating the avionics. After a military helicopter
intercepted Bob’s airplane and persons from the Transportation Security
Administration (TSA) interviewed him, the TSA interviewers discovered that Bob
was not in full compliance with TSA rules regarding how he was keeping records
of his students. After this ordeal, he then uses the experience to effectively teach
his students how to recognize and avoid SUA. Bob also discusses how keeping
safety at the forefront of their minds is a broad-based cultural issue, and not one
just related to the performance of a preflight or checking the weather.
7.5.2 In this example, a program provider would have touched on at least four of the core
topics and would have given meaning and a sense of urgency (as well as personal
immediacy) to those topics. It is likely that the subject matter would have retained the
attendees’ interest throughout the presentation(s). This is only one example where the
FIRC provider can use creativity and ingenuity to build context and make the subject
matter meaningful, all while retaining the attendees’ interest. FIRC providers are in no
way required to employ the particular approach given in this example. There are many
other approaches.
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
7
7.5.3 The FAA considers a FIRC provider as a professional educator with particular skill at
training the trainers; therefore, the FAA wishes to give the FIRC professional as much
latitude as is practical in their development of their programs. The important thing is to
teach the flight instructors practical, meaningful information that they can take to their
students the next day that will contribute to an overall fostering of a culture of safety.
This places many demands and very high expectations on the FIRC. The FAA expects
FIRC providers to excel at this skill.
7.6 Returning to Flight Instruction Training Module. The FAA understands that many
flight instructors who are reestablishing recent experience are not currently instructing
and, in some cases, may not have done so for many years. Time constraints within which
the FIRC operates restrict the FIRC provider from providing all of the information
necessary to bring an inactive flight instructor up to speed; the FIRC provider should not
attempt to do so within the context of the FIRC. Nevertheless, the nonpracticing flight
instructor in attendance is still an authority figure in aviation, and the FIRC provider
should strongly remind all inactive instructors of the responsibilities that come with their
FAA-issued authority to provide aviation training and endorsements, even if they are not
actively doing so. Building and sustaining a safety mindset in non-active instructors will
translate into a safety ethic that they will carry with them even in casual communications
with others, even if they never return to formal instructing. With that said, the FIRC
provider may (and is encouraged to) consider developing and offering an elective module
covering the topic of returning to flight instructing if they choose. Such a module may be
of particular interest to those nonpracticing instructors in attendance and may offer the
opportunity to them to learn the procedures and processes of safely returning to the
profession after some period of absence. However, this topic should be limited to a single
module and may not exceed 1 hour of the total 16 required hours. The principal purpose
of the FIRC program is to provide new and useful information to the practicing
instructor. With the exception of this single module, the FIRC provider should always
direct their presentations toward that target audience.
7.7 High Level of Training. Learning new information and developing an internal culture of
safety is every bit as valuable and important to the non-instructor airman as it is to the
flight instructor. There is little that the FIRC provider teaches the active flight instructor
at a FIRC that is not of value to the non-instructor. Therefore, FIRC providers should
actively encourage and recruit pilots and instructors of all certificate types and levels to
attend, including student pilots and ground instructors. However, the FIRC providers’
target audience is the active instructor attending to establish recent experience, and the
level of instruction should, at all times, remain at that high level. Experience has shown
that non-instructor pilots who voluntarily attend FIRCs appreciate being exposed to
higher levels of training and are fully capable of benefiting from the advanced material
presented.
7.8 FIRC Provider as an FAA Representative. An approved FIRC provider is granted the
authority to provide a basis for establishing flight instructor recent experience in
accordance with § 61.197(b)(2)(iii) or reinstating flight instructor privileges in
accordance with § 61.199(a)(1) or § 61.427(a), as applicable. In some cases, the FIRC
provider is further authorized to employ a designated ACR and validate the recent
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
8
experience or reinstatement of privileges on behalf of the FAA. In these respects, the
FIRC provider acts as a representative of the FAA and should, at all times, act
accordingly. FIRC providers should always be supportive of the FAA and constructive in
its evaluation and presentation of FAA regulations and policies. FIRC providers may not
present, nor allow the presenting, of any materials during the FIRC that are prejudicial or
contrary to the FAA’s Federal regulations or prescribed procedures. A FIRC program is
not a forum for disagreement with FAA regulations, policies, or procedures; rather, it
should engender appropriate respect for the role of the FAA and its efforts to enhance the
safety of flight and should demonstrate a proper compliance disposition toward Federal
regulations. Comments or discussions that are derogatory to the FAA, its policies, or
regulations will be grounds for immediate withdrawal by the General Aviation and
Commercial Division of the provider’s authorization to conduct any further FIRC
programs.
7.9 FAA Involvement. Although the FAA’s responsibility for the presentation of FIRCs was
transferred to industry in 1977, the overall program remains an FAA initiative. Since the
industry FIRC provider is authorized to carry out the FAA’s FIRC initiative in the FAA’s
name, authorized FIRC providers may use the FAA logo in any of their documents,
publications, or advertising that relate specifically to the presentation of authorized FIRC
programs. In this case, the FIRC provider should clearly state somewhere in their public
documentation that the FIRC provider is not the FAA, but that it is, instead, authorized to
operate the program on the FAA’s behalf. Providers should remove all FAA logos and
FAA representations from all their publications immediately upon expiration or other loss
of FAA authorization to conduct FIRCs, regardless of the reason.
7.10 Course Conduct. The FIRC provider is expected to conduct their programs and
presentations in accordance with their approved TCO.
8 THE ROLE OF A FIRC SPONSOR.
8.1 Role. Expanding upon the definition found in paragraph 5.12, a pilot association or other
aviation group that recruits an authorized FIRC provider to conduct a course to its
members is considered a sponsor. A flight school, for example, may choose to enter into
an agreement with a provider to conduct a FIRC for its flight instructors. In this case, the
flight school assumes the role of sponsor by arranging the event for the benefit of its
instructors. The sponsor may make arrangements with an authorized provider to conduct
a FIRC for continuing training that satisfies the eligibility requirements of
§ 61.197(b)(2)(iii), and in turn allows the sponsor’s flight instructors to establish recent
experience or reinstate flight instructor privileges if 3 calendar months or less have
passed since the last month of the flight instructor's recent experience period.
8.2 Branding. A sponsor’s logo may appear in the promotion of a sponsored FIRC. For
example, a sponsor’s logo may appear on the FIRC provider’s graduation certificate;
however, the FAA requires a provider’s graduation certificate to explicitly state that the
FIRC provider is the authorized organization conducting the FIRC, not the sponsor. The
sponsor may only present itself as the promoting association or group that arranged for
the provider to conduct the FIRC for its members.
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
9
8.3 Sponsorship Approval. FIRC providers are required to request and receive prior
approval from the FAA to conduct a FIRC on behalf of a sponsor’s members. See
paragraph 9.1 for FIRC contact information.
9 GENERAL PROCEDURES REGARDING FIRCs.
9.1 Contact Information. Individuals or organizations who desire to conduct FIRC
programs should contact the General Aviation and Commercial Division with their
preliminary inquiry. FIRC provider candidates may also include a copy of the TCO they
plan to use if they have already developed one. A provisional pilot school or pilot school
(under part 141) wishing to add a FIRC under part 141 appendix K should contact the
appropriate Flight Standards District Office (FSDO). The prospective FIRC provider
should submit any correspondence at least 120 days before any planned training under
the course approval. This is to allow adequate time for the FAA’s review and approval. A
FIRC provider may not schedule a FIRC program before receipt of the approval letter
from the General Aviation and Commercial Division, unless the provider receives prior
approval from the General Aviation and Commercial Division to do so. The FAA
requires individuals or organizations authorized to conduct FIRCs approved in
accordance with this AC to maintain a current mailing address, email address, telephone
and facsimile numbers, and a reliable point of contact (POC) with the General Aviation
and Commercial Division. FIRC provider applicants may submit inquiries or
documentation to the General Aviation and Commercial Division via any of the
following methods:
• The FAA FIRC email address at 9-AWA-AVS-AFS-FIRC@faa.gov (this is the
preferred method).
• The General Aviation and Commercial Division phone number at 202-267-1100.
• Direct emails to the FIRC program manager (requires prior communication).
9.2 FIRC (Part 141 Appendix K). Under part 141 appendix K, paragraph 11, a provisional
pilot school or pilot school may develop a FIRC special preparation course. Applicants
wishing to add a FIRC under appendix K should refer to this AC to develop their FIRC
TCOs. This AC provides guidance for the preparation and FAA approval of a TCO for an
industry-conducted FIRC that meets § 61.197(b)(2)(iii). Graduates from an appendix K
FIRC special preparation course who complete and pass the stage and end-of-course tests
will count towards the renewal requirements under part 141, § 141.5.
9.3 Public Versus FAA Access to Provider TCOs. Providers will provide any attendee at
an approved FIRC an opportunity to review a copy of the FAA-approved TCO at the
provider’s presentation site if the attendee specifically requests it. The FAA understands
that a TCO may be a proprietary document. An attendee, upon request, may review a
copy in the presence of the provider or a representative of the provider. However, neither
the provider nor its representative is required to allow an attendee to retain a copy or to
allow an attendee to copy the TCO (although this is permitted at the election of the
operator). In any event, the provider may not provide the attendees copies of any versions
of the tests or test pools that the provider uses in its FIRC. Upon request of any FAA
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
10
representative, the FIRC provider will provide a copy of the TCO to follow during the
presentations. The TCO is required to include all of the test questions and the answers
that the FIRC provider uses in any of its lessons, stages, or course completion
evaluations. FAA personnel may retain the documents upon request only for the time it
takes to make copies, if desired, after which the FAA will return the original copy to the
provider. FAA personnel other than the General Aviation and Commercial Division
should return any documents to the provider within 1 week unless the appropriate FSDO
and the FIRC provider make another arrangement. The FAA will not make any
documents provided by the FIRC provider available to any person or organization outside
the FAA without express written permission from the document developer or owner.
9.4 FAA Participation. Active FAA participation, either by forum or by presentation, is
permitted and encouraged, but may not exceed 2 hours of any 16-hour program
presentation and is authorized only by prior agreement between the FAA
representative(s) and the FIRC provider. The FIRC provider may request the appropriate
FSDO to participate, or the FSDO may initiate a request. The amount of FIRC schedule
time that the FAA participant will be permitted is generally at the discretion of the
provider, but it may not exceed 2 hours. The decision to allow FAA participation is solely
the prerogative of the provider unless required by a Flight Standards (FS) office
supported by the General Aviation and Commercial Division. In some rare cases,
typically as a result of a safety initiative, it may be necessary to mandate FAA
participation. In such cases, the General Aviation and Commercial Division will
coordinate between the appropriate Flight Standards office and the provider(s) to find the
best solution to ensure that disruption to the provider’s schedule is kept to a minimum.
Note: The provider may not restrict or forbid the FAA from observing any FIRC
program at any time for any reason in a nonparticipatory capacity. FIRC
surveillance is solely at the discretion of the FAA.
9.5 Cross-Provider Presentation. Except as noted below, no provider may teach a part of
their own FAA-approved TCO in conjunction with a part of another provider’s approved
TCO. Inclusion of any topic not specifically approved in the provider’s TCO, regardless
of its source, is prohibited without prior approval.
Note: In some rare cases, two approved providers may wish to combine their
programs for a special event. In such cases, all parties are required to coordinate
with the General Aviation and Commercial Division to request specific, limited
approval.
9.6 Instructor Affiliation. The principal instructor giving presentations at an FAA-approved
FIRC will be an employee or affiliate of the approved FIRC provider or be contracted by
the approved FIRC provider. In some rare cases, a provider may wish to allow a
specialist or expert at a particular field, who is not affiliated with the FIRC provider, to
teach some individual module or modules. In such cases, all parties will contact the
General Aviation and Commercial Division to request and receive specific limited
approval.
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
11
9.7 Reference Source Requirement. FIRC training standards require providers to make
available to their attendees current and applicable parts of 14 CFR (i.e., those parts that
are pertinent to pilots and flight instructors). In addition, the Aeronautical Information
Manual (AIM) should also be available during each course. These references can provide
answers to questions raised during the course which otherwise may be left unresolved.
While electronic versions of these documents are suitable for use by all providers, the
FAA encourages live classroom providers to consider printed versions (e.g., paperback)
for ease of passing around the classroom.
9.8 Training Aids Authorized for Use.
9.8.1 Use of Training Aids. FIRC providers are encouraged to use a variety of visual, aural,
and static training aids to enhance communication and understanding between instructors
and participants. Good instructional aids assist instructors in achieving desired goals in
the teaching/learning processes by supporting or supplementing lesson material when
used logically and intermittently.
9.8.2 Operational Competency. Presenters at the FIRC should be fully versed in the operation
of all equipment used during the presentations. Spare parts, such as replacement bulbs for
projectors, should always be available where appropriate, and presenters should know
how to replace those parts quickly, if necessary. The presenter should test any training
aids prior to their use to ensure that faulty equipment or a lack of understanding of the
operation of that equipment does not disrupt the class.
9.8.3 Clarity and Visibility of Training Aids. Visual aids used during the FIRC should be clear
and visible to the entire class. Lettering, illustrations, and diagrams should be large
enough to be easily seen by attendees farthest from the aids. The provider should use
colors that are clearly contrasted and easily visible. The provider should use eye-pleasing
colors and should avoid harsh contrasts. The most common error in constructing visual
presentations is to attempt to include too much information on each visual, making it
difficult to read and comprehend while listening to the instructor or moderator. The best
results are attained by using visuals that are simple and contain a single thought or
message. For example, the reproduction of an entire sectional chart projected on a screen
to emphasize the airport information block would contain too much clutter to be
effective. A follow-up visual that highlights the airport data block only would be much
more effective in presenting the message to the course attendees and should be visible
from any place in the room.
9.8.4 Innovative Techniques. In recent years, an abundance of excellent new materials and
instructional techniques in the field of training aids has been developed. These aids
present many advantages for the FIRC programs; however, each chief instructor should
keep the teaching goals in mind when adopting them. For example, presentations to flight
instructor attendees should focus on how the flight instructor can do their job well as an
instructor. For an instructor to be most effective, the instructor should thoroughly know
the subject matter that instructor is teaching. The provider should design the presentations
around techniques that will help the attendees be more effective as instructors rather than
solely as a review of the required subject matter. If they are not actually giving the
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
12
instruction during a particular module of learning, the presenter should continuously
monitor the instruction given and the participants’ progress to ensure that the instructor is
delivering a quality product and that the instructor meets the goals and objectives of the
training syllabus.
9.8.5 Use of Video Presentations. FIRC providers are encouraged to use video and/or aural
presentations as an aid to maintaining attendee interest and as a tool to better convey
important information to the attendees. Except for internet-based FIRCs, the FAA
requires providers to limit video and aural presentation use to not more than 50 percent of
the entire course hours. An instructor (well-versed in the subject matter and material)
who provides introduction and closure will moderate each video and aural presentation.
The information provided via the internet will constitute significantly more video and
aural content, since the alternative is largely limited to simple onscreen text. However,
the information provided by video and/or aural presentations in internet curricula should
always be germane to the topic(s) presented.
9.9 Inability of an Attendee to Complete the FIRC. A FIRC attendee completing the
course to establish flight instructor recent experience or reinstate flight instructor
privileges in accordance with § 61.199(a)(1) or § 61.427(a) who, because of extenuating
circumstances, fails to satisfactorily complete all of the approved FIRC program may, at
the discretion of the provider, attend a later-scheduled FIRC program presented by that
same provider or may receive personal training from that same provider on those topics
that the attendee did not complete. Upon full and satisfactory cumulative completion of
that provider’s FIRC, the provider may then issue a graduation certificate to the instructor
attendee that reflects the date of the final completion of all required instruction. This
procedure is not intended to permit an instructor attendee’s intentional absence from any
part of a FIRC provider’s program for other than unforeseen (emergency) circumstances.
The rationale for this is that each live, in-person FIRC program presentation has a certain
“flow” that could be disrupted when an attendee takes one or more portions out of the
designed and approved sequence. Those providers who are approved for course
presentations over an extended period of time have somewhat more latitude in that they
can conduct an individual makeup session within the span of time before the next
scheduled module.
9.10 Product Manufacturer Representatives. A provider may utilize a product
representative from the industry to present a module, or a portion of a module, in a FIRC
program as a guest speaker, if invited by the provider. However, that representative may
not use the FIRC as a venue to promote a particular product. The representative may
discuss their product, but such discussion should be in the context of other, comparable
products. If at any time the FAA determines that an industry representative is using a
FIRC presentation as an opportunity to sell a product, the FAA may withdraw its
authorization for the provider to present any additional FIRCs.
9.11 Instructional Level. The emphasis of a FIRC program is to teach the instructor how to
teach students, rather than simply teaching the instructor. The target audience is the
active flight instructor, who is expected to possess the basic knowledge that is implicit in
their certification. The FAA understands that many FIRC attendees may not be active
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
13
instructors. Even when nonpracticing flight instructors make up the bulk of the attending
class, the target audience remains the active instructor. Active instructors will
immediately carry the knowledge and skills gained from the FIRC and apply it to the
aviation industry. The FAA expects FIRC providers to meet this high-level training
standard to train the target audience effectively.
9.11.1 Advanced Training. Advanced training is not limited to rote learning (memorization) but
rather promotes critical thinking. Effective critical thinking fosters aeronautical decisionmaking (ADM) and safe flight. FIRC programs should challenge, motivate, and inspire
FIRC attendees.
9.11.2 FIRC Training Standards. The FAA requires FIRC programs to meet current FIRC
training standards. A FIRC provider should not spend valuable instructional time
reviewing basic pilot knowledge that all flight instructors are expected to know. A FIRC
should not teach the flight instructor at a private pilot level. FIRCs should present
challenging lessons designed to transfer meaningful information to attendees in order to
help flight instructors carry out their role more effectively. FIRC providers should
consider the following training standards when developing their TCO:
1. FIRC providers should conduct courses that present new, challenging, and pertinent
information presented at an advanced knowledge level commensurate to the active
flight instructor.
2. FIRC providers should conduct courses that effectively provide continuing training
and education pertinent to flight and ground instructors.
3. FIRC providers should conduct courses that enhance the ability of active instructors
to instruct effectively.
4. FIRC providers should conduct courses that enable the instructor attendees to
promote a culture of safety aimed at reducing GA accidents.
9.11.3 FIRC Testing Standards. FIRC testing standards require FIRC providers to develop and
present test questions for all lesson presentations. This helps ensure that FIRC attendees
gain effective knowledge transfer from each lesson. Exams should align with the key
topic points (subject matter elements) presented in each lesson plan of the provider’s
TCO. Test questions should also be reasonably challenging and plausible. See
paragraph 11.11 for more information concerning test questions and paragraph 13 for
testing procedures.
9.11.4 Course Authorization Standards. The FAA will not authorize or continue to authorize any
FIRC program that does not meet FIRC training and testing standards.
9.12 Records. The FAA requires all FIRC providers to maintain a record of the complete
name and address of all instructor attendees and whether the provider issued or denied a
graduation certificate. If the provider denies a graduation certificate, the provider has the
responsibility to record the reason for the denial. The provider is responsible for
maintaining this record for a period of at least 24 calendar months. Recordkeeping may
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
14
be digital. The provider also has the responsibility to retain records for attendees who
only receive a course completion certificate.
9.13 Aircraft Category Specialization. A FIRC may, at the operator’s discretion, find it
useful to focus their program on a particular category of aircraft flight instructor
(e.g., rotorcraft or glider). The FAA may approve such a program if the provider meets
general FIRC training standards and the associated core topic requirements outlined in
Appendix A, Required Instructional Core Topics for FAA-Approved TCO Curricula.
Attendance by any flight instructor at any approved FIRC, whether or not that FIRC
specializes in a particular category of aircraft, is an acceptable basis for establishing flight
instructor recent experience or reinstatement of flight instructor privileges if 3 calendar
months or less have passed since the last month of the flight instructor's recent experience
period. This is acceptable even if the instructor does not hold a certificate or rating in the
category of aircraft to which the FIRC is oriented. For example, a flight instructor who
holds a commercial single-engine rating with instrument pilot certificate and a singleengine airplane instructor rating may attend an authorized helicopter-focused FIRC and
may use a graduation certificate from that FIRC as a basis for establishing recent
experience or reinstatement of privileges in accordance with § 61.199(a)(1), even though
they do not hold a rotorcraft pilot certificate or a rotorcraft flight instructor rating. For
this reason, the FAA requires that all FIRC providers meet all general FIRC training
standards.
9.14 FSDO Capacity to Validate Recent Experience or Reinstatement Documentation.
The capability of a FSDO to administratively process documentation to validate flight
instructor recent experience in accordance with § 61.197(b)(2)(iii) or reinstatement of
flight instructor privileges in accordance with § 61.199(a)(1) or § 61.427(a) is based upon
that office’s work priorities and available staff. Therefore, to avoid placing an undue
workload on a particular FSDO, providers who do not have an ACR on their staff are
encouraged to contact the appropriate FSDO well in advance to determine the capability
of that office to handle the anticipated number of flight instructors expected to reestablish
their recent experience or reinstate flight instructor privileges upon successfully
completing the FIRC. It may be advantageous to advise the FIRC graduates that they
should present their documentation to the appropriate FSDO and that they should do so at
intervals rather than in large numbers at any one office on a given day. The instructor
attendee must present their documents to a FSDO before the end of the flight instructor’s
current recent experience period, and before the FIRC graduation certificate has expired
to maintain their flight instructor privileges.
9.15 Validating Recent Experience by Mail. Under certain limited circumstances, attendees
may validate their flight instructor recent experience by U.S. mail. Order 8900.1,
Volume 5, Chapter 2, Section 11, Subparagraph 5-504E, Procedures for Validating Flight
Instructor Recent Experience Via U.S. Mail, outlines this procedure. Order 8900.1 is
available to the public through the FAA’s DRS at https://drs.faa.gov/. Information on the
notary service required when applying by mail may be found at the U.S. Department of
State (DOS) website at https://travel.state.gov. The instructor validating recent experience
by mail should coordinate with the processing FSDO prior to mailing their
documentation.
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
15
9.16 Integrated Airman Certification and Rating Application (IACRA). FIRC providers
should utilize the IACRA internet-based program for processing recent experience or
reinstatement documentation when practical. The provider should direct questions
concerning how to utilize this program to the appropriate FSDOs.
10 TCO DOCUMENT DEVELOPMENT—GENERAL.
10.1 TCO Length. Many new providers inquire as to how long the TCO document should be.
There is no set length. The FAA encourages providers to use as much detail as they feel
appropriate to fully describe what they intend to do and how they intend to accomplish
their goals. Adequate detail makes it easier for the FAA to fully grasp the content and
pattern of presentation, thereby often shortening the approval process. Each distinct unit
of information presented in the TCO should be on a separate page or pages (e.g., table of
contents, revision page, facilities description, and personnel descriptions). Additionally,
each individual instructional unit should be on its own page. Separating distinct units of
information by page will make revisions and revision tracking easier. At the same time,
the FAA is not seeking a large number of pages for volume’s sake. Providers should not
include superfluous information in the TCO just to make it look bigger. Providers should
exercise common sense to fully describe the program that they plan to present. Detailed
information regarding specific TCO components is found in paragraph 11.
10.2 Subject Matter Requirements. All providers, at a minimum, will include all of the core
topics identified in Appendix A.
10.2.1 Core Topics. Core subjects are those mandated by the Administrator. Providers should
design core topic lessons to meet FIRC training standards by designing lessons that
challenge the target audience and ultimately enhance safety of flight. The FIRC provider
may incorporate or combine core topics with other topics in any logical manner. In this
case, the provider should clearly identify the location of each core topic within the
subject matter and ensure sufficient allocation of time to each of the core topics,
regardless of its location. To ensure adequate coverage, each core topic should deliver
robust lesson content. In all cases, the FAA will make the final determination of whether
a provider’s core topic lesson meets the training standards for a FIRC curriculum.
10.2.2 Elective Topics. The FAA encourages providers to develop and offer elective modules
covering suitable aviation topics. Providers may choose and add as many elective topics
as they wish. The provider may consider building a “library” of electives. To ensure
adequate coverage of the material, each elective topic should deliver robust lesson
content. In all cases, the FAA will make the final determination of whether a provider’s
elective lesson meets the training standards for a FIRC curriculum.
10.2.3 Course Content Consideration. Topics should be fully developed and designed at a level
to challenge and stimulate critical thought from the target audience. For example:
10.2.3.1 An elective lesson on airspace corresponds to the sport pilot or private pilot
training level and is not worthy of a FIRC curriculum targeted to the active
instructor. Instead of conducting an airspace lesson to instructors as a review,
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
16
providers should recognize that this lesson offers the opportunity to deliver
advanced instructional training that teaches the instructor to teach more
effectively.
10.2.3.2 A FIRC provider should offer advanced training methods to the target
audience, discuss common error in understanding airspace, and/or develop the
attendees’ scenario-based training skills by correlating the regulatory weather
minimums with minimum safe altitudes to determine what ceiling is necessary
when departing or approaching an airport. Teaching the target audience
advanced instructional techniques ultimately affords greater knowledge
transfer to their students and clients.
10.2.4 Approval of Electives. The FAA requires FIRC providers to receive approval of an
elective topic before a provider may present it. The provider has the responsibility to
inform the FAA of the change(s) and identify where in the program the change has taken
place. This can be in the form of a simple email notification to the FIRC email address at
9-AWA-AVS-AFS-FIRC@faa.gov. The FAA will receive the notification and grant
approval before the provider presents the changed topic. The FAA will acknowledge
receipt of the notification and approvals.
10.3 Themes. The provider should weave the following themes throughout the content of all
lessons and discussions. Each is of such importance that they should be recurring themes
seen throughout the entire FIRC experience.
10.3.1 Culture of Safety. The principal and most important theme that should be apparent
throughout the entire FIRC program of training is the importance and degree of
responsibility of the flight instructor toward furthering aviation safety. All of the lessons
should contribute to the development of a safety culture mindset that attendees will take
with them as they both fly and teach others to fly. The culture of safety and the flight
instructor’s role and responsibility in furthering that culture cannot be overemphasized.
Instructors should be strongly reminded of the inherent duties and responsibilities that are
imparted to them upon issuance of their instructor credentials, chief of which is
promoting safety.
10.3.2 Aeronautical Decision-Making (ADM). ADM skills are an inherent component of a fully
realized safety culture. ADM is simply the skill and ability to quickly make correct
safety-related decisions in the aeronautical arena, be it in the air or on the ground. Risk
assessment skills and risk mitigation skills are critical components of ADM. This may
seem obvious, but the point is often overlooked when trying to discover some “higher
meaning” in the ADM term. The fact is that every person, whether they are a pilot or not,
makes many safety-related decisions every day. It may be as simple as whether to drive a
car on an icy day. It is simply common sense based on acquired knowledge. When cast in
this light, ADM becomes far less mysterious and esoteric, thereby making it much easier
to grasp as a concept and to incorporate into the overall safety culture. All pilots are
taught ADM, but the concept can be conveyed far more effectively if it is presented in
these simpler, everyday terms. The provider should weave this topic throughout the entire
FIRC program.
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
17
10.3.3 Professionalism. Professionalism is normally defined as receiving pay or compensation
for expert knowledge or skill in a particular area or field. The flight instructor is,
therefore, a professional. Yet, many times, flight instructors do not recognize this in
themselves or they simply forget that they are the holders of very specialized and unique
knowledge and skills. They may forget the critically important role that they play in
furthering aviation safety. Many flight instructors only give flight instruction to build the
hours necessary to move on to the air carriers. This attitude belittles the profession of
primary flight instruction. It is important that flight instructors be reminded that they are,
in fact, aviation professionals and of the important role they play in aviation safety,
regardless of their goals. Even though this topic is a FIRC core requirement, it should be
a recurring theme throughout the entire FIRC program.
10.3.4 Ethics. Closely related to professionalism is the concept of professional ethics. It has
often been said that ethics is what people do when others are not looking. The provider
should remind instructors that their certificate conveys great authority. Instructors have
the ability to make entries in pilots’ logbooks, sign certificate applications, conduct flight
reviews, etc. All of these actions can have a direct impact on their clients’ ability to fly
safely. An example of unethical behavior would be a flight instructor who signs a pilot’s
logbook when that flight instructor has not actually given a flight review. Beyond simply
being contrary to Federal regulation, it is important that the flight instructor is reminded
that it is neither ethical nor professional and why. To be professional, flight and ground
instructors should understand the seriousness of the duties and responsibilities that come
with being an FAA-authorized instructor. The provider should emphasize a sense of
professionalism and value in doing the right thing when exercising the privileges and
responsibilities that come with being a flight or ground instructor.
10.4 Minimum Course Hours Requirements. Curricula presented for FAA approval
consideration should consist of no fewer than 16 hours of ground and/or flight
instruction. Providers may offer more. Providers may distribute those hours any way they
choose, in that they do not need to be contiguous, nor must the provider complete all
16 hours of training within a concurrent 2-day span. For example, providers may offer
portions of the curriculum on a monthly basis. The key is ensuring that the attendee
receives all of the authorized information. A flight instructor may use no portion of the
approved FIRC program for recent experience or reinstatement credit if the instructor has
taken that portion before the applicant last established recent experience. In other words,
the applicant is required to have received all 16 hours of the approved TCO within their
most current 24 calendar month recent experience period. For reinstatement of flight
instructor privileges in accordance with § 61.199(a)(1) or § 61.427(a), as applicable, all
16 hours of the approved TCO must be completed within 3 calendar months from the last
month of the flight instructor's preceding recent experience period. If the provider
chooses to spread their program over an extended period (e.g., 2 years), they are solely
responsible for ensuring any attendee is compliant. Failure to do so may result in an
invalid application for validating flight instructor recent experience. Because of the
logistical difficulties, FIRC providers are strongly advised not to employ this option for
periods exceeding 1 year; nevertheless, it remains the option of the operator. If the
provider modifies their TCO in the middle of an extended program of training, the
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
18
provider is responsible for ensuring that attendees are provided all of the training in the
TCO that is approved at the time of their graduation.
10.5 Training Block Timeframes. Reasonable variances in the timeframe to accommodate
individual learning differences and other situations may arise from time to time during
the FIRC presentations. The potential for these variances should be considered when
determining the adequacy of the estimated timeframes of the overall course, the course
stages, and the individual lessons. The FIRC provider should consider the following
concepts when developing their TCO:
10.5.1 There are required minimum times to teach any particular topic, including core topics.
Minimum instructional times apply to all FIRCs, including internet-based programs.
10.5.2 The minimum period authorized to present a core topic lesson is 45 minutes.
10.5.3 The minimum period authorized to present an elective lesson is 30 minutes; however, the
FAA may approve an elective topic presentation designed for less than 30 minutes if the
provider requests and provides sufficient justification.
10.5.4 The provider’s TCO should specify the anticipated amount of time that the provider will
spend on each lesson topic. It should specify the expected start and stop times of each
lesson.
10.5.5 The overall FIRC program should consist of the minimum specified 16-hour course
(ground and/or flight instruction, breaks, and testing) and comply with acceptable
teaching standards and techniques appropriate to the TCO used.
10.5.6 For the purposes of the FIRC, a program hour consists of 60 minutes.
10.5.7 Each hour, except non-working lunches and dismissal hours, may include a 10-minute
break after each 50-minute learning session without taking away from the total required
16 hours. A provider may credit up to 120 minutes (2 hours) toward the 16-hour course
minimum timeframe for attendee rest breaks. The course provider will not receive credit
for additional breaks offered. The provider may, for example, offer a 100-minute (1 hour,
40-minute) training block period of training followed by a 20-minute break. However, the
provider may not continue training throughout an 8-hour day with no breaks and then end
the day 1 hour and 20 minutes early. Unbroken spans of instruction should never exceed
2 hours in length.
10.5.8 Pre-course registration, lunch periods, dismissal hour, or graduation activities other than
the distribution of graduation certificates may not be included as part of the hours of
instruction creditable to § 61.197(b)(2)(iii) or § 61.199(a)(1).
10.5.9 Part of the required 16 hours may include testing but may not exceed 30 minutes in any
given 8-hour span of instruction.
10.5.10 Providers may use a lunch period as an approved instructional block if all attendees are
present during the lunch period and the TCO identifies the topic of instruction that the
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
19
provider is to cover. If the provider exercises this option, it needs to be identified in the
TCO, as would any other instructional block of time.
10.5.11 The chief instructor is responsible for ensuring the full attention of the participants and
that the attendees complete all lessons, achieve all lesson objectives, and do not abuse
permitted break privileges.
10.6 Instructional Techniques/Alternatives. The provider should seek the most desirable
and/or alternative instructional techniques available that a certificated instructor may find
effective in learning during the FIRC. Although there are well-established traditional
methods of training, the provider should explore any effective alternatives in developing
their program. The goal is to transfer critical new and useful information to the attendee
in an effective manner. How the presenter accomplishes the transfer is entirely up to the
provider, who is expected to be an expert in the field of training trainers. The underlying
premise should emphasize teaching ability and the skills necessary for flight instructors to
convey new information to their students successfully. The course should be both
challenging and thought-provoking. Construction of the TCO should follow the general
guidance in this AC to ensure expeditious approval. The FAA seeks to ensure a certain
level of FIRC program standardization and emphasizes the coverage of program areas
believed essential to enhance the knowledge, skills, and instructional capability of
attending flight instructors.
10.7 Completion Standards. The goal of the FIRC is to effectively transfer knowledge to the
attendee. The only objective way to measure the degree to which the provider obtained
this goal is to test the attendees in some manner. Paragraph 13 discusses the importance
of testing in the FIRC program.
10.8 Workshops. The curriculum may contain workshops or discussion forums as part of the
approved TCO to foster an open exchange of information among everyone in attendance.
However, a workshop or discussion forum should not be conducted as a venue for
attendees to simply share aimless past experiences or “war stories.” Instead, a FIRC
provider should develop a plan for the discussion forum or workshop. The FIRC
provider’s plan should include a forum objective, pertinent information, and critical new
information as it applies to the exchange of information. Objectives define strategies or
implementation steps to attain the identified goals. Unlike goals, objectives are specific,
measurable, and have a defined completion standard. The FAA expects the FIRC
provider to set objectives and goals for any discussion forum or workshop. The goal of a
FIRC provider’s discussion forum or workshop should enhance the attendee’s ability,
elevate their instructional skills, and enhance GA safety. The provider should structure
any such forum to reflect the high standards of excellence expected of the FIRC program.
The provider should carefully monitor and moderate these forums. All instructor
attendees are required to be present for them to complete the course successfully. Any
open forums/workshops, while encouraged, are limited to 1 hour of the 16 hours of
course material.
10.9 Topic Sequencing. Topic sequencing identified in the TCO may be adjusted when the
provider feels an adjustment to lesson sequencing is beneficial for a particular in-person
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
20
FIRC presentation. If the sequencing is adjusted, the FIRC provider should provide an
actual schedule of a particular in-person FIRC to the FAA when requested. This will
allow aviation safety inspectors (ASI) to adjust their schedules if they wish to observe
only particular topic(s) of the FIRC. Because of the inherent flexibility of the internet,
providers of internet-based programs may optionally allow their online attendees to move
more freely about the course, taking different modules in differing sequences. This is at
the discretion of the internet FIRC provider; however, the provider should remain
mindful of the building block method of learning and “fine tune” their attendee’s ability
to move through the subject matter topics accordingly.
10.10 Flight Component. Providers who wish to incorporate a flight component into their
approved TCO are required to first contact the General Aviation and Commercial
Division by any of the methods identified in paragraph 9 to discuss this aspect of their
development plans.
10.11 Graduation Certificates and Completion Certificates.
10.11.1 Graduation Certificates as a Basis for Establishing Recent Experience or Reinstatement
of Flight Instructor Privileges.
10.11.1.1 A graduation certificate issued by an approved FIRC provider may serve as
the sole basis for a flight instructor establishing recent experience under the
provisions of § 61.197(b)(2)(iii). Pursuant to this provision, the graduation
certificate must show that the flight instructor establishing recent experience
has successfully completed an approved FIRC within the preceding 3 calendar
months of issuance. Further, the flight instructor must be within the preceding
24 calendar month recent experience period at the time they present the
application (refer to § 61.197) to maintain flight instructor privileges. After
the 24 calendar month recent experience period lapses, flight instructor
certificate privileges may be reinstated through the provisions of § 61.199 or
§ 61.427, as applicable.
10.11.1.2 A graduation certificate issued by an approved FIRC provider may serve as
the sole basis for reinstatement of flight instructor privileges under the
provisions of § 61.199(a)(1) or § 61.427(a), as applicable, if the flight
instructor is within 3 calendar months from the last month of the flight
instructor's recent experience period. The graduation certificate must show
that the flight instructor reinstating privileges has successfully completed an
approved FIRC within the preceding 3 calendar months of issuance. After this
period lapses, flight instructor certificate privileges may be reinstated through
the provisions of § 61.199(a)(2) or (3), or § 61.427(b), as applicable.
10.11.2 Contents of a FIRC Graduation Certificate. A FIRC provider is required to issue a
graduation certificate that contains all of the following information in order to be a valid
basis for establishing flight instructor recent experience or reinstatement of flight
instructor privileges:
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
21
1. The full name and address of the organization (or provider) holding FAA approval to
conduct the course;
2. The full name and address of the graduate;
3. The date of issuance;
4. The signature of the chief instructor;
5. A statement that the graduation certificate expires 3 calendar months from the month
of issuance;
6. Provider contact information;
7. A sequential number; and
8. The expiration date of the provider’s current authorization to conduct FIRCs.
Note: The provider may preprint the expiration date on the certificate or a FIRC
representative may fill it in at the completion of each presentation. However,
under no circumstances may a provider or representative issue a graduation
certificate without the expiration date of the provider’s current authorization
clearly printed somewhere on the document. The verbiage may be placed
anywhere on the front or back of the graduation certificate and should read:
“[PROVIDER’S NAME] is authorized by the Federal Aviation Administration to
conduct FIRC programs that may serve as a basis for establishing flight instructor
recent experience in accordance with 14 CFR part 61, § 61.197(b)(2)(iii) or
reinstatement of flight instructor privileges in accordance with 14 CFR part 61,
§ 61.199(a)(1) or § 61.427(a). [PROVIDER’S NAME] current authorization
expires on [DATE].”
10.11.3 Information on Establishing Recent Experience or Reinstating Flight Instructor
Privileges. The provider should note that:
10.11.3.1 The applicant must submit a completed and signed FAA Form 8710-1,
Airman Certificate and/or Rating Application, or FAA Form 8710-11, Airman
Certificate and/or Rating Application – Sport Pilot, as applicable (or IACRA
equivalent).
10.11.3.2 The applicant must submit a copy of the graduation certificate to a certifying
official (ACR, ASI, aviation safety technician (AST), or authorized
Designated Pilot Examiner (DPE)) before the end of the preceding
24 calendar month recent experience period and within the graduation
certificate validity period if they wish to establish their recent experience
based on attendance at that FIRC.
10.11.3.3 For reinstatement of flight instructor privileges based on completion of the
approved FIRC, the applicant must submit a copy of the graduation certificate
to a certifying official (ACR, ASI, AST, or authorized DPE) before the end of
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
22
the 3 calendar month period following the last month of the flight instructor’s
preceding 24 calendar month recent experience period.
10.11.3.4 The provider may use any verbiage that they think most effectively transmits
that critical information to the attendees and may place that information
anywhere they choose on the front or back of the certificate.
10.11.3.5 Failure to inform the attendee of these requirements may result in the
attendee’s inability to reestablish their recent experience or reinstate flight
instructor privileges.
10.11.4 Graduation Certificates as Basis for Ground Instructor Recency. A graduation certificate
issued by an approved FIRC provider may serve as the sole basis for a ground instructor
to meet the recent experience requirements under the provisions of § 61.217(c).
10.11.5 Contents of a Ground Instructor Graduation Certificate. A FIRC provider must issue a
graduation certificate that contains all of the following information in order to be a valid
basis for satisfying a ground instructor’s recent experience requirement:
1. The full name and address of the organization (or provider) holding FAA approval to
conduct the course;
2. The full name and address of the graduate;
3. The date of issuance;
4. The signature of the chief instructor;
5. A statement that the graduation certificate expires 12 calendar months from the month
of issuance;
6. Provider contact information;
7. A sequential number; and
8. The expiration date of the provider’s current authorization to conduct FIRCs.
10.11.6 Completion Certificates. The provider, at their discretion, may issue a completion
certificate to any attendee who will not need to use successful FIRC attendance as a basis
for meeting any FAA regulatory or policy requirement. A flight instructor may not use a
completion certificate as a basis to establish recent experience or reinstate privileges.
Additionally, a completion certificate does not meet the annual training requirements for
the chief instructor or assistant chief instructor of a part 141 pilot school or provisional
pilot school. Testing as a prerequisite for receiving a completion certificate at the
conclusion of the FIRC program is also at the discretion of the FIRC provider.
11 TCO STRUCTURE AND CONTENTS. This paragraph provides guidance regarding
how the TCO should physically be structured and what the provider should include in the
TCO. Providers may construct their TCOs in any manner they wish. The document
should follow a logical sequence and be easy to read and reference. Each TCO submitted
for approval should contain at least the following:
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
23
11.1 Page Numbering and Version Identification. Each page (including the cover page)
should be sequentially numbered, dated as appropriate, and should identify the version
number. This may be in the form of a footer or header, or otherwise placed in any
obvious and consistent location on each of the pages.
11.2 Cover Page. The TCO should have a cover page containing the full name and address of
the FIRC provider/organization. This should be the name and address that will appear on
the Letter of Authorization (LOA) when issued. The cover page should also include the
name, address, current telephone number, facsimile number (if available), and email
address of a POC.
11.3 Table of Contents. The cover page should be followed by a table of contents with a list
of all lesson plans intended to be taught during the course, as well as other constituent
components of the TCO. The table of contents should clearly identify lesson plans that
represent or include the required core topics (identified in Appendix A), as well as all
additional elective topics selected by the provider. The table of contents should present
the lessons in a manner that allows the reader to easily recognize specific core and
elective topics and content. At the discretion of the provider, the larger topic framework
may incorporate core topics; however, the table of contents should clearly identify each
of the core topics by some obvious manner, such as an asterisk. The principal reason for
this level of detail is primarily because an FAA inspector may wish to monitor only a
specific topic or topics and should be able to easily determine where they occur during
the program allow them to synchronize their arrival time if necessary.
11.4 Revision Page. A revision summary page will follow the table of contents page.
11.5 Facilities. A description of the facilities will follow the revision page. The description of
the facilities should include a depiction of physical classroom facilities, such as climate
control (air conditioning/heating), lighting, seating, work areas, distraction avoidance,
noise control, and any other pertinent physical environmental characteristics that may
influence the learning experience (in-person FIRCs only).
11.6 Training Aids. The TCO should include a description of audiovisual aids that will be
available for use including, but not limited to, chalk boards, slide and/or overhead
projectors, video recorders/players, tape recorders, CD/DVD players, computer
data/information presentation, and internet access. If the TCO program is internet-based,
the TCO should describe the system requirements that the online attendee will meet to
ensure that the program operates smoothly.
11.7 Chief Instructor/Assistant Chief Instructor/Program Presenter.
11.7.1 Chief Instructor. The TCO will list the name, airman certificate number, and
qualifications of the chief instructor. The chief instructor will meet the requirements of
§ 141.35(d) and include a compliance statement in the TCO, addressing the certificate
and experience requirements of a chief instructor required for a part 141 pilot school or
provisional pilot school course of training leading to flight instructor certification.
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
24
11.7.2 Assistant Chief Instructor. Where requested by the provider, the TCO will list the name,
airman certificate number, and qualifications of the assistant chief instructor. The
assistant chief instructor will meet the requirements of § 141.36(d) and include a
compliance statement in the TCO, addressing the certificate and experience requirements
of an assistant chief instructor required for a part 141 pilot school or provisional pilot
school course of training leading to flight instructor certification. The chief instructor
may delegate any of their responsibilities to an approved assistant chief instructor.
11.7.3 Serving Multiple Providers. A chief or assistant chief instructor may not serve more than
one FIRC provider without requesting and receiving written authorization from the FAA.
11.7.4 Program Presenters. The TCO should list the qualifications of other instructors, lecturers,
moderators, or panelists who will present the provider’s program. These persons need not
be limited to certificated ground or flight instructors; however, they should be recognized
experts in the subjects of their presentations or specialty areas. The principal instructor
who is giving presentations at any specific approved FIRC (in-person FIRCs only) should
be an employee or affiliate of the approved FIRC provider or be contracted to the
approved provider.
11.8 Prerequisites. The TCO should state the enrollment prerequisites for flight instructors
planning to attend a FIRC. Eligibility to reestablish recent experience through the FIRC
program is limited to flight instructors who are within their 24-month recent experience
period. Eligibility to reinstate flight instructor privileges through the FIRC program is
limited to flight instructors whose privileges have lapsed by no more than 3 calendar
months. Reestablishment of recent experience or reinstatement of flight instructor
privileges are both predicated on full attendance and satisfactory completion of the FIRC.
This does not preclude instructors beyond either these recent experience or reinstatement
periods, or any other interested parties, from attending if they choose to do so for their
own information. On the contrary, the provider should encourage such attendees to
attend. Those who are attending for reasons other than establishing recent experience or
reinstating privileges will not receive a FIRC graduation certificate. Instead, they may
receive a course completion certificate.
11.9 Daily Schedule. The TCO will include a daily schedule, including the start and stop
times for each lesson and the lesson title. The provider may choose any period of time
they feel is appropriate to cover a particular topic or module adequately. The presenter
should make every attempt to adhere to the topic duration established in the schedule.
However, it is understood that particular interest or activity in a given module or topic
may mean that the provider exceeds the duration established for that particular lesson.
This is acceptable to a certain extent, although the provider should remain mindful to
adequately cover subsequent topics and modules. Major changes that may result in the
exclusion of another topic requires preapproval by the FAA.
11.10 Syllabus. A training syllabus will consist of a collection of lesson plans. Each individual
lesson plan will include, at a minimum, a description of each lesson to be presented. Each
lesson plan will describe all ground and/or flight components (where applicable), lesson
objectives, completion standards, and the measurable unit of accomplishment or learning.
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
25
The provider should identify appropriate reference materials that the presenter will use
during the presentation. The provider should print an individual lesson plan for each core
and elective topic, or unit of training, on its own page(s). The individual lesson plans will
contain at least the following elements:
11.10.1 Lesson or Module Title. In a practical sense, the lesson or module title section will be the
title of the lesson or module unit of training. If the module contains more than a single
topic, this section should identify (in broad terms) the topic(s) covered in that module.
11.10.2 Lesson Objective. The “Lesson Objective” section of a FIRC provider’s lesson plan
should clearly specify the desired attendee learning outcomes and should be consistent
with the objectives and subject matter elements of the particular module or unit of
training. The FAA understands that in any session of training the presenter will offer a
great deal of information, and that the attendee will not realistically be expected to
memorize the material verbatim. The attendee should retain the bulk of the material and
the key specific points presented. It is important to fully identify lesson objectives; be
specific. As examples, two lesson objective descriptions are shown below; one
inadequate, followed by a more acceptable example:
11.10.2.1 Inadequate Example. At the end of this lesson, the attendee will know about
Crew Resource Management (CRM).
11.10.2.2 Adequate Example. At the completion of this lesson, the attendee will:
• Be able to describe the basic tenets of CRM and its importance to flight
safety, including its applicability to training in technically advanced
aircraft (TAA);
• Understand how CRM differs between single-pilot and two-pilot
environments, and the attendee will have learned effective methods to
teach cockpit management skills to their clients/students in the classroom
and in the cockpit; including chart placement, note/clearance taking, and
accessibility to alternate charts and flight information in the event the pilot
must deviate to another airport; and
• Understand the importance of being able to effectively communicate this
information to their clients/students in a clear and concise manner.
11.10.3 Subject Matter. The subject matter portion of each lesson plan should offer an expanded
discussion of the specific subject matter elements the presenter will teach in a particular
module or unit of training, as identified in the “Module Objectives” section. This is not
intended to be a comprehensive discussion. The subject matter elements presented in the
FIRC provider’s lesson plan should make clear to the reviewer what the intent of the
provider is regarding the subject matter and identify the principal knowledge components
of the topic(s) that the provider intends to transfer to the attendee. The FAA is interested
in the major points of information that the provider is offering the attendees in the
specific topics for which they are approved. FIRC providers are required to present all of
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
26
the subject matter elements listed in its lesson plans during the delivery of its presentation
and align those subject matter elements to its exam questions.
11.10.4 Completion Standards. The completion standards should state the observable or
measurable level of knowledge and skills required of each attendee at the end of the
course, module, or lesson. For example, the following statement, “The instructor attendee
must score a minimum of 70 percent on each written examination given,” would combine
both the observable and measurable levels of knowledge and skill. The provider may set
the minimum standard higher if they wish; however, they may not reduce the standard
below 70 percent. If the provider wishes to employ a nontraditional method of
completion standard, they should contact the General Aviation and Commercial Division.
11.10.5 Testing Procedures. To meet TCO development standards, the provider should provide a
description of the testing procedure used to measure the attendee’s proficiency. This
discussion should identify and describe the form of test (e.g., individual paper tests
handed out, tests presented on a screen, etc.). For example, “The attendee will answer a
series of multiple choice questions related to this topic at the end of the day in which the
topic was presented, and again in the final test at the end of the program. The test will be
in printed form and handed to the applicant for completion.” This statement says that the
provider will specifically test the applicant on this topic or module on two different
occasions using a printed multiple choice format.
11.10.6 Testing Timeframe. Total testing time that may be credited toward the 16-hour FIRC
minimum time requirement may not exceed a 1-hour cumulative period. The FIRC
provider may allot additional testing time beyond the 16-hour minimum FIRC timeframe.
11.11 Written Test Questions. The FIRC provider will provide a comprehensive written test
or test question pool with an answer key in the submitted TCO.
11.11.1 The provider should provide source materials (references) from which the answers to the
questions were derived. References should be sufficiently detailed to allow FAA
personnel to easily locate those references if FAA personnel feel it is necessary to verify
or confirm specific information presented in the test. Inadequate references will result in
denial of the approval.
11.11.2 Test questions need to be appropriate to the lesson plans and subject areas the provider
will teach. Test questions should reflect the key points of each lesson. FIRC testing
standards require all multiple choice test questions to offer at least three challenging
(plausible—not giveaway) answer choices (a, b, or c choices). Standards for post-lesson
testing do not allow true/false questions. The FAA encourages essay questions whenever
feasible. The FAA expects all providers to administer closed-book exams for tests given
at live, in-person FIRCs.
11.11.3 Since many courses present as many as 16 lessons, including electives, the provider
should require each attendee to answer at least 60 unique test questions to ensure
adequate testing in all subject areas. All 60 test questions do not have to be given at the
same time; however, at least 30 of the questions will be given at the end of the entire
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
27
FIRC program, and that final test will be comprehensive, rather than simply covering
material presented subsequent to any possible earlier tests given during the FIRC. A
participant’s successful completion of the FIRC is dependent upon a minimum score of
70 percent on each written test administered. Individual providers may set higher
standards.
11.11.4 The provider may provide the test questions, answers, and references as an appendix to
the TCO to allow other non-FAA personnel to see the TCO without seeing the tests and
their answers. However, the FAA requires the provider to submit it as a component part
of the TCO when seeking FAA approval.
Note 1: The FAA requires FIRC providers to update and revise the written
test(s) question pool at least once during each biennial approval period. This does
not necessarily mean replacement of each of the questions. The provider should
update the questions to reflect any changes in the course content and any
regulatory or policy changes that may have occurred during the previous approval
period. In addition, the provider should alter multiple choice answer sequences
(where used) and should reword or recast preexisting questions.
Note 2: See paragraph 12 for additional information pertaining to internet-based
FIRC testing.
11.12 Graduation Certificate. The provider should include a copy of the graduation certificate
that it will issue to its attendee and a copy of a completion certificate (if one is to be used)
in the TCO package presented for review. See paragraph 10.11 for the details outlining
the specific information that is required on the graduation certificate.
11.13 Remedial Training. If the provider plans to offer remedial training for those attendees
who fail to meet the minimum completion standards, the TCO should include a
description of the method to accomplish such remedial training and subsequent retesting.
The 16-hour minimum course timeframe requirement does not include remedial training
or remedial testing. As with all FIRC exams, the provider will conduct remedial testing as
a closed-book exam. Providers who elect not to provide remedial training and testing to
instructor attendees who fail to meet the minimum testing standards should include a
statement in their TCO to that effect. In this case, the TCO would reflect the fact that
graduation certificates will not be issued to instructor attendees who fail to satisfactorily
complete the full course requirements, including all tests administered.
12 INTERNET-BASED PROGRAMS.
12.1 Internet/Web-Based Programs. The FAA will evaluate all internet or web-based FIRC
curricula on a case-by-case basis. Groups or individuals who wish to submit an
internet-based FIRC program will contact the General Aviation and Commercial Division
and notify them of their intent. Provider applicants are encouraged to provide graphical
outline representations of their proposed training programs for review and consideration
by the General Aviation and Commercial Division. The graphical representation of an
internet-based FIRC should contain a step-by-step description of how participants will
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
28
enroll and access the study and support material for each lesson in order to effectively
navigate through the course to completion. An internet-based FIRC program should be
prepared in accordance with applicable guidance and recommendations contained in this
AC. The FAA neither requires nor expects the applicant to print every screenshot used in
the FIRC presentation; online access for the FAA to review this material prior to approval
is sufficient. The FAA requires all FIRC applicants to submit a brief TCO that contains
general information about the FIRC, as well as the items listed in paragraphs 12.1.1
through 12.1.10. Where a stated requirement is not considered applicable to an
internet-based FIRC program, the provider should identify that requirement and provide a
reason for its inapplicability. The provider is required to make available to the FAA
free-form access to the completed FIRC training site, as well as the actual lesson mode
used for the attendee. Free-form access means that the FAA is able to navigate freely
throughout the program as desired, rather than being compelled to follow topics
sequentially or meet course time requirements required for the attendee. This includes
access to testing. The FAA strongly recommends that a provider or organization,
intending to present an internet-based FIRC program, arrange to meet with the General
Aviation and Commercial Division in advance to discuss the planned program outline
before committing time and effort to its development. This will assist in ensuring that the
program follows a standardized process to the extent possible and might help reduce the
time needed for its development, review, and approval by the FAA. Outlines for
internet-based FIRCs should contain, as a minimum, the following information
considered specifically applicable to an online FIRC curriculum:
12.1.1 Minimum Hour Verification Statement. The FAA requires all providers to ensure that the
FIRC provided, and the attendee completed, a minimum 16-hour FIRC. The FAA does
not expect an online FIRC provider to require a minute-to-minute 16-hour minimum
course timeframe. The FAA recognizes that an online course has different characteristics
from a live FIRC. An online FIRC is an automated, web-based, one-on-one instructional
process that should provide flexibility for the attendee’s individual learning style. An
online FIRC, however, is required to legitimately deliver a 16-hour course that is
equivalent to a live FIRC. Online FIRC providers are required to include a minimum
hour verification statement in their TCO. This statement should include a description of
how the provider will ensure that the attendee completed the minimum 16 hours of course
(see paragraph 10.5). The verification statement should explain the provider’s method to
ensure that each attendee will actively participate and complete all the lessons presented
in the course. The FAA requires that a FIRC provider’s planned method of assurance
include the following procedures:
12.1.1.1 Minimum Hour Assurance Plan Matrix. All authorized online FIRCs will
present a minimum of 16 hours of course material, as determined by each
online provider’s Minimum Hour Assurance Plan Matrix. Like the live FIRC,
the 16-hour minimum course period includes provisions for attendees’ breaks,
lessons, graphics, and testing. The online FIRC provider is required to create a
minimum hour assurance plan and include this plan in a matrix as a
component of the organization’s TCO (see the example provided in
Appendix B, References and Job Aids, Table B-1, Minimum Hour Assurance
Plan Matrix).
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
29
12.1.1.2 Integrated Lesson Plans. The sample matrix provided in Appendix B shows
a breakdown of a sample TCO in terms of individual core topics. While some
providers structure their TCO in this manner, this sample matrix is not meant
to imply that this method is required. Rather, the sample matrix is designed to
provide understanding of the FAA’s intent for the minimum hour assurance.
The FAA recognizes that some FIRC providers integrate various core topics
in theme-based lessons that combine the topics over several segments. In that
case, the FAA would expect the FIRC application to contain a Minimum Hour
Assurance Plan Matrix that corresponds to the structure of the TCO.
12.1.1.3 Lesson Presentation Period Integrity. FIRC training standards require that
all attendees open and view each lesson. To facilitate this training standard,
the provider’s online automation courseware (learning management system
(LMS)) needs to ensure that the attendee views and completes each lesson in
its entirety without skipping any portion. FIRC training standards require
audio/video, aural, and text lesson presentations to contain and present a
cumulative period of no less than 720 minutes (12 hours) of the FIRC’s
16-hour minimum course content (see Appendix B). If the attendee exits the
lesson anywhere before the end, the attendee should return to the point of exit
and complete the lesson. The provider’s LMS (courseware) will determine the
point of exit from an incomplete lesson.
12.1.2 Source Materials. The source of all study materials used to support the course elements
that will appear on the internet, and a description of all drawings, mockups, demos, or
links used by the provider in the course.
12.1.3 Identity Verification. The methodology proposed to determine the identity of course
participants at logon and during navigation of the lessons, including intentional or
unintentional disruption of the lesson flow. Additionally, the TCO should describe
methodologies proposed to prevent multiple concurrent logons by a course participant for
the purpose of viewing or printing material during inappropriate stages of the lesson.
12.1.4 Testing Materials Security. A FIRC provider should include a statement in its TCO
stating that the provider will ensure that attendees are not given access to any completion
test(s) until the course materials for which the test is applicable have been satisfactorily
completed. This statement should include an explanation that the provider’s LMS will
ensure that the test will remain inaccessible to the attendee until the attendee completes
the prerequisite lesson(s).
12.1.5 FAA Access. The methodology proposed to allow the FAA access to course materials,
tests, and test results for the express purpose of reviewing and monitoring the course as
deemed appropriate by the FAA.
12.1.6 Online Attendee List Availability. A statement that the provider will, upon request,
provide the FAA a listing of all internet FIRC program participants that contains, at a
minimum, the provider’s name and location, the instructor attendee’s name, identification
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
30
number or code, the date(s) the course was administered, and the completion status of all
course participants.
12.1.7 Data Security. Methodologies proposed to ensure data availability, integrity,
confidentiality, and accountability for course materials, participant information, and
lesson plans.
12.1.8 Recent Experience or Reinstatement Validation Methodology. If appropriate, the manner
in which the provider will process applications to validate flight instructor recent
experience or reinstatement of privileges in accordance with § 61.199(a)(1) or
§ 61.427(a), as applicable.
12.1.9 Revisions. The manner in which the provider will present future revisions to the approved
TCO. The FAA has the responsibility to approve these revisions before they are included
in the online program.
12.1.10 Other Information. Any other information the provider may consider necessary or
appropriate by the FAA during development of the online program.
13 TESTING PROCEDURES.
13.1 Minimum Testing Standards. The most effective practical method for assessing the
retention of material presented during the FIRC is using a knowledge test. This is most
frequently presented in the form of multiple choice questions, although some providers
employ essay questions or a mixture of both. All are acceptable methods of providing
quantitative data reflecting the flight instructor’s current state of knowledge in specific
areas. The expectation of a test at the conclusion of any course of study will motivate a
student to increased levels of attention. It is no different at a FIRC. The mission of a
FIRC is to ensure that the attendees take with them what the providers give them in terms
of practical knowledge and a safe operational mindset. It is incumbent upon the FIRC
providers to take this aspect of the FIRC very seriously and design their tests in light of
this mission. Tests should be sufficiently demanding so the exam provides a true
measurement of knowledge transfer from the course to the attendee. Tests should be
reflective of the material presented. The provider should not ask any question that does
not relate to the course material. A minimum passing score is 70 percent. Since the
mission is knowledge transfer, providers may retrain deficient attendees to 100 percent if
they choose to, provided that they give adequate retraining in the attendee’s deficient
knowledge areas. The provider needs to retest attendees who receive additional retraining
only on the deficient areas; however, the questions used for the makeup test portions
must be different from the ones first answered incorrectly.
13.2 Test Questions. Written tests will consist of a minimum of 60 unique multiple choice
questions relating to the material covered. Providers may, and are encouraged to, use
more if they choose. FIRC exam questions should include at least four reasonably
challenging and up-to-date questions, which align with (are derived from) the subject
matter elements of each lesson plan. Providers may give a single final test of
60 questions, or they may break out 30 of those 60 questions into smaller units given at
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
31
different times during the 16-hour program. Duplicated questions do not meet FIRC
testing standards. The remaining minimum of 30 questions should be in the form of a
comprehensive final test given at the conclusion of the training. This final test should
include at least 10 unique questions derived from earlier lessons prior to any previous test
and at least 20 questions from the remaining lessons to make the final test comprehensive
and reflect all the material presented throughout the entire 16-hour course.
13.3 Alternative Testing. Providers may use methods other than multiple choice questions for
testing. An acceptable alternative would be essay questions. In such a case, the provider
must conduct at least 50 percent of the total testing at the conclusion of the FIRC
program. These tests must be comprehensive in nature, covering all of the material
presented throughout the entire course. True/false questions do not meet FIRC testing
standards and the FAA will not authorize them. Note that a provider may use true/false
questions for lesson pretesting, as some providers use pretesting as a teaching technique.
Providers may explore other methods of testing; however, they must coordinate with the
General Aviation and Commercial Division and must provide sufficient justification for
deviation from the standard methods.
Note: Because of the inherent flexibility in taking an internet-based FIRC,
internet FIRC providers may employ testing at the end of each module as an
alternative. No fewer than 5 questions per module will be acceptable, and the total
of all questions need to meet or exceed the minimum of 60 questions. (See
paragraph 13.7.)
13.4 Oral Testing. Providers may use oral testing to supplement retention assessment as an
adjunct to written tests. However, oral testing may not supplant or replace written tests.
Oral testing is optional on the part of the individual provider. Written testing, as
described in this section, is mandatory for all providers.
13.5 Test Records Retention. Providers will retain all versions of each attendee’s tests, to
include any failing tests if applicable, in a secure location for a period of 24 calendar
months and will make them available to the FAA on demand. Test storage may be digital.
13.6 Conventional In-Person FIRC Testing. Providers should design exams to test the
retention of a range of information provided during the FIRC program. Therefore, the
provider should not give instructor attendees the written tests nor allow instructor
attendees to complete them during class subject sessions presentations. Attendees should
not be permitted to compare responses while the tests are being administered or to grade
their own tests. Providers will retrieve and retain all copies of the tests in a secure
location at the conclusion of the testing period. Attendees will not be allowed to take
them with them when they leave. The chief instructor or assistant chief instructor is
responsible for ensuring compliance with these requirements and that test integrity is not
compromised. Providers may retest attendees to 100 percent if they choose to, provided
that they give adequate retraining for the attendee’s deficient areas. Attendees who
receive retraining on deficient areas need only be retested on those specific areas;
however, the questions used for the makeup test portions must be different from the ones
first answered incorrectly.
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
32
13.7 Internet FIRC Testing. When a provider presents an internet FIRC in a lesson-by-lesson
manner (as opposed to stages found in a conventional in-person FIRC program), a written
test consisting of at least five multiple choice questions relating to the material covered in
each lesson should be administered following each lesson. The total number of questions
for the course will meet or exceed 60. A minimum score of 70 percent is required for
satisfactory completion of each test administered. A score of less than 70 percent will
require the attendee to restudy the material and retake the test for that lesson. The
programming may not allow the attendee to proceed until the attendee achieves that
minimum score. Providers may retest online attendees to 100 percent if they choose to,
provided that they give adequate retraining specific to the attendee’s deficient areas.
Attendees who receive retraining on deficient areas need only be retested on those
specific areas; however, the questions used for the makeup test portions must be different
from the ones first answered incorrectly. A second score of less than 70 percent on any
specific lesson will require contact with the course provider for instructions on how to
proceed. No two internet-based tests can be identical. The provider must randomize tests
between attendees and with individual attendees taking FIRCs at a later date.
14 TCO REVISION, AMENDMENT, OR DELETION.
14.1 Required and Optional Revisions. Providers or organizations approved to present FIRC
programs are required to revise their subject matter as necessary to reflect changes in
policy or recommendations. Revisions in response to changing emphasis in subject
matters currently listed in Appendix A and other subject matters selected for periodic
emphasis by the FAA will usually be deferred until the provider renews their
authorization. Additionally, the FAA requires providers to change exams at least once
every 2-year renewal period. Providers may make any changes they wish to their TCOs
throughout the approval period, provided that they include, at a minimum, the current
core topics listed in Appendix A or any other changes that the Administrator has
determined necessary. However, the General Aviation and Commercial Division must
approve all proposed substantive changes to the TCO before the provider presents them
in a FIRC.
14.2 Submission of Revisions. The provider should email a revised TCO with all proposed
revisions to 9-AWA-AVS-AFS-FIRC@faa.gov or send them by any of the methods
identified in paragraph 9.1. The provider should submit a single digital (i.e., Microsoft
Word document) copy of the change(s), accompanied by a revised TCO, and a separate
electronic letter requesting approval of the change(s). The provider may not include the
revised material in the FAA-approved presentation until actual receipt of the letter of
approval from the General Aviation and Commercial Division. Changes to the selection
of any preapproved electives (provided that lesson plans for each are on file with the
FAA) do not need approval; only email notification to the same FAA email address
identifying what the elective changes are and where and when the provider will present
them. It is highly recommended that any submitted documents to the FAA email address
require an electronic return receipt. A change of chief instructor or assistant chief
instructor will require notification to the General Aviation and Commercial Division in
accordance with the instructions contained in paragraph 16.
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
33
14.3 Method. The method for revising, amending, or deleting materials in the TCO should:
• Ensure approval chronology.
• Include the effective date of change or revision.
• Ensure ease in identifying changed or revised material.
• Include entry of change on a revision summary page.
• Include written guidance describing the revision procedure that the provider will use.
15 SCHEDULING OF COURSES. FIRC providers are required to keep the General
Aviation and Commercial Division directly apprised of the dates, times, and locations of
each course presentation. This is typically accomplished in the form of an email or
physical mail.
15.1 FAA Safety Team (FAASTeam) FIRC Scheduling Website. The FAA intends to
provide FIRC information at https://www.faasafety.gov to display upcoming FIRC
events. The intent is for the public to be able to find general FIRC information, as well as
specific information on participating FIRC providers. As such, FIRC providers will have
a place to input basic information about their programs. Information will include provider
name, website (if applicable), contact email, contact telephone, and the current schedule
of presentations. Listings of FIRC presentations may include state, city, dates, and times.
If, for any reason, a FIRC provider does not wish to have their information listed, they
may select the option to disallow their information from being visible to the public. Any
provider who chooses not to allow their information to be visible to the public must
nevertheless maintain their schedule data for FAA personnel. The FAA will treat such
data as proprietary and not permit access to it outside the FAA.
15.2 Inability to Upload. If the provider is unable to upload schedule information for any
reason, they must notify the General Aviation and Commercial Division of their
scheduling plans directly, preferably via the FAA’s FIRC email address at 9-AWA-AVSAFS-FIRC@faa.gov or through any of the methods identified in paragraph 9.1. The
provider should notify the General Aviation and Commercial Division at least 2 weeks
prior to the expected presentation to allow the FAA sufficient time to arrange for an ASI
to observe if it wishes.
15.3 Scheduling Website Versus Information Website. The FAASTeam FIRC scheduling
website should not be confused with the FAA’s FIRC general information website
located at https://www.faa.gov/pilots/training/firc.
16 CHANGE OF CHIEF INSTRUCTOR OR ASSISTANT CHIEF INSTRUCTOR.
The approved FIRC provider should notify the General Aviation and Commercial
Division when making a change in the provider’s chief instructor (or assistant chief
instructor where designated). A FIRC provider may not conduct FIRCs without an
authorized FIRC chief instructor. The FIRC provider should notify the General Aviation
and Commercial Division at least 45 days before the change, but in no case later than
10 days after the change. Notification should be in electronic form and include an
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
34
updated TCO with the new chief or assistant chief instructor’s information (i.e.,
Microsoft Word document or Portable Document Format (PDF)).
17 CHANGE OF PROVIDER. Should a change in provider occur due to sale or other
reason and no change in personnel or course content occurs, the providers (both old and
new) are required to notify the General Aviation and Commercial Division at least
15 days before the presentation of any FIRC programs conducted under the new FIRC
provider. If it is an internet-based program, the provider should notify the FAA within
48 hours of transfer of the private rights to the program to the new owner by email sent to
the FAA FIRC email at 9-AWA-AVS-AFS-FIRC@faa.gov. If the change in provider
involves any change in personnel of the approved FIRC TCO, authorization to conduct
any further FIRCs is canceled until the new provider has obtained FAA approval.
18 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH AN APPROVED TCO. The failure of a FIRC
provider or its representatives to comply with an approved course of training, or to
complete any required corrective action on a timely basis, as deemed appropriate, can be
the basis for denial or withdrawal of the FAA’s approval and associated delegation of
authority. When the FAA determines that a revision to a previously approved TCO or
related corrective action is necessary, the provider will be given no more than 60 days to
make the necessary revision or corrective action, as appropriate. Should the provider not
make the necessary revision or corrective action within 60 days, FAA approval and
authorization to conduct FIRC programs will be withdrawn automatically.
19 FIRC APPROVAL PROCESS.
19.1 TCO Document Submission. Candidates requesting authorization to become a FIRC
provider should submit a written request and a TCO to the General Aviation and
Commercial Division for consideration. (See paragraph 9.1 for methods of contacting and
transferring documents to the General Aviation and Commercial Division.) A provisional
pilot school or pilot school (under part 141) wishing to include or add a FIRC under
part 141 appendix K should submit a written request and a TCO to the appropriate FSDO.
When the FAA receives an authorization request, the General Aviation and Commercial
Division, or the certificate holding FSDO for a provisional pilot school or pilot school
under part 141, when applicable, will conduct a thorough review of the TCO. Candidates
should understand that they have full responsibility for developing and maintaining a
TCO that complies with the requirements for TCO approval and subsequent FIRC
program presentations. If the TCO meets all the guidance and recommendations
discussed in this AC, the FAA will issue an approval. The FAA will not issue an approval
when a TCO does not meet FIRC TCO development, training, and testing standards, so
please verify that the TCO follows the guidance and recommendations provided in this
AC before the General Aviation and Commercial Division or certificate holding FSDO
receives it for review.
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
35
Note: The FAA will not approve an initial or renewal request without receiving a
TCO from the organization requesting authorization. As such, all candidates and
FIRC providers should develop, submit, and maintain an up-to-date TCO. Upon
FAA consideration and authorization, the TCO serves as a record for the provider
and the FAA.
19.2 FAA LOA. When the FAA finds that a FIRC TCO meets authorization standards, they
will forward a signed letter indicating approval of the submitted TCO to the provider
electronically. The approval letter constitutes authority to conduct FIRCs at locations
either within or outside the United States. The FAA may withdraw approval at any time
for sufficient cause, but, in any case, will become invalid on the last day of the
24th month after original approval, unless the FAA grants a renewal or other form of
continuation approval. FAA personnel will monitor one of the first FIRCs presented by a
new provider. The FAA will approve an internet FIRC on a case-by-case basis, and the
FAA will provide approval by the same method as for any other FIRC.
19.3 Field Inspections. The appropriate FSDOs are expected to monitor these programs to the
extent possible. The appropriate FSDO, a representative of the General Aviation and
Commercial Division, or any other representative of the FAA Administrator may monitor
FIRC presentations at any time on a random basis.
20 FIRC RENEWAL, WITHDRAWAL, OR CANCELLATION.
20.1 Renewal Requests. FIRC providers holding approval who desire to renew their
authorization to conduct FIRC programs beyond the date of original expiration should
send their request for renewal to the General Aviation and Commercial Division. (See
paragraph 9.1 for methods of contacting and transferring documents to the General
Aviation and Commercial Division.) It is the provider’s responsibility to ensure that its
FIRC approval has not expired. Should the FAA’s approval of a FIRC expire, a
graduation certificate issued by the provider after the expiration date is invalid. The FAA
will not honor a graduation certificate issued by a provider that held an expired approval.
Additionally, an ACR designation, if held, is no longer valid after the expiration of a
FIRC LOA and, therefore, may not be used.
20.2 Required Renewal Documents. Approved providers who wish to renew an already
existing FIRC TCO will submit a complete, new digital TCO with a new submission date
and an updated revision page. The provider should clearly identify any changes from the
previously approved TCO. The FIRC provider should convey the most up-to-date
information possible. The FIRC provider has the responsibility to continually research
and keep abreast of dynamic issues affecting the training needs of pilots. However, if
there are no changes to the body of the TCO, then the cover letter will state that there
have been no changes. In any event, each provider is still required to update the tests or
test question pool each renewal period as discussed in paragraph 11.11. If the provider
submits a TCO containing the most up-to-date information possible and has only changed
the test(s) in the resubmitted documentation, the revision page will show a revision date
with the notation “Updated test(s) only.”
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
36
20.3 Reissuance of LOAs. Upon a finding by the General Aviation and Commercial Division
that the submitted TCO is in compliance with current FIRC TCO development, training,
and testing standards, as discussed in this AC, and is otherwise acceptable, the General
Aviation and Commercial Division will issue a new LOA establishing a new expiration
date. Failure to comply with the FAA-approved TCO or the FIRC standards discussed in
this AC, or the failure to incorporate necessary changes to the existing TCO when so
directed by the General Aviation and Commercial Division in writing, may be sufficient
cause for withdrawal of the approval.
20.4 Retention of Expired Documents by the FAA. If the General Aviation and Commercial
Division has not received a letter from the FIRC provider requesting renewal as described
above, or if the provider requests to surrender its authorization, the FAA will not return
the materials originally approved and presented by the applicant; in this case, the FAA
may choose to destroy those materials. The provider may not present any courses from
that point on. To reestablish approval, the applicant should then comply with the original
application procedures as outlined in this AC.
Note: The FAA will not notify FIRC providers of an approaching expiration date.
Monitoring a provider’s approval period is the responsibility of the provider.
21 APPLICATION AND APPROVAL OF AN ACR EMPLOYED SOLELY BY A
FIRC PROVIDER.
21.1 Reissuance. An ACR affords the FIRC provider the ability to process flight instructor
applications to validate recent experience in accordance with § 61.197(b)(2)(iii) or
reinstatement of privileges in accordance with § 61.199(a)(1) or § 61.427(a), as
applicable, and forward them directly to the Airmen Certification Branch without directly
involving the FSDO.
21.2 Requirements for Employing an ACR. FAA-approved FIRC providers who have held
their approval for a period of at least 12 calendar months and presented at least one full
FIRC program within that year may qualify to request designation of an ACR for their
FIRC.
21.3 ACR Appointment. Appointment of an ACR is the responsibility of the appropriate
FSDO. Qualified providers should contact their FSDO directly to make application to
employ an ACR for their program. Approval or denial of a provider’s application for an
ACR is made at the discretion of the appropriate FSDO.
21.4 ACR Designation or Renewal. Procedures and requirements for the designation or
renewal of an ACR are outlined in Order 8000.95, Designee Management Policy, as
amended.
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
37
22 AC FEEDBACK FORM. For your convenience, the AC Feedback Form is the last page
of this AC. Note any deficiencies found, clarifications needed, or suggested
improvements regarding the contents of this AC on the Feedback Form.
Robert Ruiz for
Lawrence Fields
Executive Director, Flight Standards Service
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
Appendix A
A-1
APPENDIX A. REQUIRED INSTRUCTIONAL CORE TOPICS FOR FAA-APPROVED
TCO CURRICULA
1. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) may periodically revise subject matter listed
herein to reflect the changing emphasis determined by the FAA for the establishment of flight
instructor recent experience under Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR) part 61,
§ 61.197(b)(2)(iii). Flight instructor refresher course (FIRC) providers should check the FIRC
informational website at least once every 90 days for any updates or changes in FIRC policy,
guidance, or resources. The website is located at https://www.faa.gov/pilots/training/firc.
2. The core topics described below are those that approved FIRC providers are required to
present during any FAA-approved FIRC program presentation. The FAA does not require the
FIRC provider to use verbatim titles for the required core topics; however, the FIRC provider
will identify core topics in the training course outline (TCO) for FAA review (see
paragraph 11.3). The provider may teach these core topics individually or in combination when
teaching them together is appropriate. However, the provider should teach these core topics in
logical succession and in cohesive units consistent with the instructor attendees’ need to know,
their ability to understand the subjects, and the core topics’ application to the instructional
process.
3. The instruction presented should be clearly identifiable as relating to the required core topics
listed here. No fewer than 16 hours of instruction may be given in each FIRC program (including
course material and additional time allowed for breaks, testing, etc.). The provider needs to
incorporate all core topics listed below within these 16 hours or greater of instruction. There are
minimum time requirements for individual core and elective topics. This is because it is not
likely that the presenter could cover any individual core topic comprehensively in less than
45 minutes or elective topic in less than 30 minutes. The provider should identify the expected
time that a presenter will spend on a given topic in each of the TCO’s lesson plans. The provider
should also identify each topic’s expected start and stop times in the TCO’s schedule page. The
provider, at their discretion, may present additional subject matters germane to flight instruction
as elective topics in meeting the total 16-hour requirement. The General Aviation and
Commercial Division or pilot school/provisional pilot school Principal Operations Inspector
(POI), as appropriate, will review and approve these subjects on a case-by-case basis. Once the
FAA grants initial TCO approval, the provider can submit additional subject matter topics via
email to the FAA’s FIRC email address at 9-AWA-AVS-AFS-FIRC@faa.gov (or the certificate
holding FSDO for a provider that is a part 141 pilot school or provisional pilot school).
4. The FIRC provider should design each of its lessons in a manner that teaches its attendees
how to teach their clients and students effectively. To meet this goal, the FIRC provider should
convey the most pertinent and up-to-date information possible. This places the responsibility on
the FIRC provider to continually research and keep abreast of dynamic issues affecting the
training needs of pilots. Conveying timely information through the FIRC program promotes
flight instructor awareness of dynamic issues that General Aviation (GA) pilots need to know.
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
Appendix A
A-2
REQUIRED CORE TOPICS.
A.1 Navigating in the 21st Century: Pilotage to Global Positioning System (GPS),
Automation, and Technically Advanced Aircraft (TAA). GPS has quickly become the
principal means of navigation for many GA pilots. Pilots and aircraft owners are taking
advantage of modern avionics and flight automation equipment. Glass cockpits are
equipped in most new aircraft, as well as available for many legacy and experimental
aircraft. GPS, positioning on a moving map, weather depiction, terrain/traffic awareness,
and modern autopilots have made a significant presence in the GA fleet. While this
represents a significant improvement in GA and navigation, overdependence on
automated systems also introduces a number of new potential hazards. Instructors should
be aware of what the systems can and cannot do, and be well versed in the potential
hazards that pilots may encounter due to the use of automation, such as excessive headsdown time, automation fixation, automation dependency, database currency and limits,
etc. Pilots should learn their airplane’s limitation, systems limitations, and all
manufacturer’s recommended procedures for its use before a pilot can fly the aircraft
safely. This is especially important for TAA equipped with automated avionics and flight
automation systems (e.g., flight management system (FMS) or coupled autopilots).
Instructors should be able to quickly recognize systems automation-based risky behavior
in their students and how to correct it. Instructors should also ensure that their students do
not become overdependent on these systems to the exclusion of the more traditional
methods of navigation, such as pilotage, dead reckoning, and very high frequency
omnidirectional range (VOR). Pilots using advanced automation must remain proficient
in manual aircraft control to fly safely and not allow the use of the aircraft’s automation
to degrade their primary skills. Advanced avionics and flight automation offer many
levels of automation. Pilots need to understand that no one level of automation is
appropriate for all flight situations. If an automation system failure occurs, in whole or in
part, the pilot should possess the knowledge and skill to address the situation.
Therefore, the FAA strongly recommends that pilots and flight instructors strive for
proficiency in every aspect of the aircraft flown, which includes maintaining the pilot’s
proficiency in manual aircraft control to mitigate the risk of loss of aircraft control. Pilots
transitioning to TAA, or any unfamiliar aircraft, should receive specialized transition
training from a qualified flight instructor with experience in the specific aircraft’s make,
model, and equipment. Flight instructors also need to fully understand the definition of
TAA, Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B), and Next Generation Air
Transportation System (NextGen). Therefore, FIRC providers should also include
training on the regulatory definition of TAA, an overview of ADS-B, and an overview of
NextGen in this lesson.
A.1.1 Technically Advanced Airplane (TAA). FAA/Industry Training Standards (FITS)
initially described a TAA as “an aircraft that contains GPS navigator with a moving map,
plus any additional systems (e.g., an autopilot combined with a GPS navigator is also a
TAA).” However, in the summer of 2018, the FAA specifically defined the term
technically advanced airplane in the federal aviation regulations under § 61.1 and defined
the qualifying requirements for TAA under § 61.129(j).
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
Appendix A
A-3
A.1.2 Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B). ADS-B replaces radar
technology with satellites to track aircraft movement, which in turn provides major
advantages. ADS-B is a foundational NextGen technology. Real-time ADS-B is now the
preferred method of surveillance for air traffic control (ATC). GA is safer with ADS-B
traffic, weather, and flight-information services. Safety and efficiency improve with
advanced ADS-B.
A.1.3 NextGen. NextGen is a large-scale FAA initiative to modernize the U.S. National
Airspace System (NAS) in the 21st Century. Through NextGen, the FAA has modernized
air traffic infrastructure in communications, navigation, surveillance, automation, and
information management with the aim of increasing the safety, efficiency, capacity,
predictability, flexibility, and resiliency of American aviation. NextGen’s scope includes
airport infrastructure improvements, new air traffic technologies and procedures, and
safety and security enhancements.
A.2 Security-Related Special Use Airspace (SUA): What’s Going on Where; How to
Stay Clear. Several significant airspace changes have resulted from the events of 9/11.
Pilots in training depend on their instructors to guide them through the intricacies of the
new and changing airspace regulations and to make them aware of the consequences of
violating those airspaces. “Floating” temporary flight restrictions (TFR), particularly
common during election years, are a significant challenge for pilots. Regulations
regarding powerplants and stadiums are now in place. Instructors should have thorough
knowledge about concepts entirely new to many GA pilots, such as the Washington, DC
Flight Restricted Zone (FRZ) and Special Flight Rules Area (SFRA), formally the Air
Defense Identification Zone (ADIZ). In addition, all pilots should be made fully aware of
intercept procedures. The consequences of violating airspaces have become much more
severe and often allow little flexibility with respect to enforcement.
A.3 Transportation Security Administration (TSA): What Flight Instructors Need to
Know to Stay Out of Trouble. The TSA now has a role in flight training. Consequently,
flight instructors should know which airman certificates the TSA is interested in.
Instructors should also be aware of the requirements for citizenship documentation,
recordkeeping, foreign student processing, flight instructor and flight school security
awareness training, and more. FIRC providers should deliver up-to-date training designed
to assist and ensure that the flight instructor attendee is fully aware of the latest TSA
requirements. The FIRC represents an ideal venue to update the instructor on the TSA’s
role and requirements in flight training. Not following the TSA guidelines properly can
have serious consequences both for the student and for the flight instructor.
A.4 How to Teach Effectively and Build a Culture of Safety. Flight instructors are highly
trained individuals. They hold vast amounts of knowledge gleaned during their own
training and through their own experiences. Having a well-founded basis of knowledge is
critical to being an effective instructor. However, if that highly trained and
knowledgeable instructor is unable to convey their knowledge to a student, then the
instructor is ineffective as a flight instructor, regardless of knowledge and expertise.
Teaching is an art. It requires not just an understanding of the topic, but an understanding
of how people think and learn. It requires a certain amount of psychological
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
Appendix A
A-4
understanding. Virtually all instructors took coursework in the fundamentals of
instruction, which offers a basic theoretical framework for the teaching and learning
processes. As presented in the FIRC setting, this topic is expected to build upon and
expand those skills necessary to effectively transfer knowledge to pilots. Incumbent upon
this is building the instructor’s ability to instill a culture of safety in the minds of their
students and to spread and support the safety mindset throughout their aviation workplace
on an everyday basis.
A.5 Current Safety Trends in GA: How Flight Instructors Can Directly Contribute to
Aviation Safety. The United States has the largest and most diverse GA community in
the world, with more than 220,000 aircraft, including amateur-built aircraft, rotorcraft,
balloons, and highly sophisticated turbojets. Over the last 25 years, GA accident rates
have been continuing on a very slight downward trend, but there is still room for
improvement. Even one fatality is too many. Although the fatal accident rate is declining,
in fiscal year (FY) 2017, 347 people still died in 209 GA accidents. What are some of the
causes of accidents? What types of accidents have declined? What types of accidents
have increased and why? What are the things that flight instructors in particular can do to
influence those trends? Seven of the 10 top causal factors in GA accidents involve
low-altitude maneuvering and loss of control (LOC) of the aircraft. These include
takeoffs and landings, stall/spin accidents, initial climb, and low-altitude maneuvering,
among others. Instructors need to be aware of these safety trends and the causal factors
behind these accidents, such as excessive angle of attack (AOA), aircraft Weight and
Balance (W&B), bank-induced G loading, and many others, and how to avoid them. Risk
management (RM) and risk intervention strategies are aeronautical decision-making
(ADM) processes designed to systematically identify hazards, assess the degree of risk,
and determine the best course of action. These processes begin with the identification of
hazards, followed by assessments of the risks, analysis of the controls, making control
decisions, using the controls, and monitoring the results. It is the responsibility of the
flight instructor to instill these skills in their students and other pilots with whom they fly.
However, to do so effectively, they should have the ability to clarify and present this
knowledge in such a way that their students absorb the knowledge at a fundamental level
so that when faced with a RM or risk intervention opportunity, they can respond quickly
and accurately to mitigate or eliminate the risk. At the same time, instructors must also be
skilled in instilling those RM mechanisms in such a way as to make them integral parts of
their students’ safety mindsets, yet not instill unreasonable fear in those students who
may still be developing their skill sets.
A.5.1 Contributing to GA Safety. The FAA’s goal is to reduce the GA fatal accident rate by
10 percent over a 10-year period (2009-2018) and beyond. Flight instructors play a
leading role in promoting GA safety. You can find more information concerning GA
safety in the FAA Fact Sheet – General Aviation Safety at https://www.faa.gov/newsroo
m/general-aviation-safety?newsId=21274.
A.5.2 FAA Industry Partnerships Identifying and Reducing Risks. Using data, the FAA and
industry are working together to identify risk, pinpoint trends through Root Cause
Analysis (RCA), and develop safety strategies. The FAA and the GA community carry
out this work through their partnership with the General Aviation Joint Safety Committee
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
Appendix A
A-5
(GAJSC) and other industry groups. Flight instructors can provide targeted training in
response to findings and recommendations from these groups.
A.5.3 Helicopter Safety. The FAA partners with the International Helicopter Safety Team
(IHST) and the U.S. Helicopter Safety Team (USHST) to promote safety and reduce civil
helicopter accidents and fatalities worldwide.
A.5.4 Lesson Development. While the FAA requires FIRC providers to present a
comprehensive overview of current GA safety trends as a core topic, they should also
present the theme of the flight instructor’s role in enhancing safety in this lesson and
weave this theme throughout the entire FIRC program.
• You can find more information concerning the GAJSC at http://www.gajsc.org/.
• You can find more information concerning the USHST at http://www.ushst.org/.
A.6 Pilot Deviations: Their Causes and How to Teach Pilots and Students to Avoid
Them. Flight instructors should understand that GA pilots are responsible for more than
80 percent of all pilot deviations and that pilot deviations were responsible for 63 percent
of runway incursions in FY 2012. The FAA defines a pilot deviation as an action of a
pilot that results in the violation of a Federal aviation regulation. Pilot deviations are
broadly classified as either airborne deviations or surface deviations. Within each of these
two broad classifications are a number of subclassifications. The principal areas of
concern in the airborne classification include altitude deviations, course deviations, and
airspace incursions. The principal area of concern within the surface deviation
classification involves runway incursions, but surface deviations also include
vehicle/pedestrian violations. While the outcomes of most pilot deviations are benign,
any deviation has the potential to be catastrophic. Because of this potential for
catastrophic outcome, pilot deviations are a major concern in both the aviation industry
and within the FAA. Since all pilot deviations involve pilots, and virtually all GA pilots
receive training from flight instructors at some point, the flight instructor plays a critical
role toward reducing the pilot deviation incident rate. This necessitates an intimate
understanding on the part of the instructors of the causes of these incidents, and the
development of tactics to recognize and avoid those situations that may have a potential
to result in a pilot deviation. For example, flight instructors should understand that not
meeting the FAA Aviation English Language Standard (AELS) directly affects a pilot’s
ability to avoid runway incursions and other potential pilot deviations. FAA AELS
ensures efficient communications for receiving and understanding a clearance issued by
ATC. Thus, a flight instructor should consider the pilot’s ability to meet FAA AELS
during any flight evaluation or training event that the instructor conducts. (The core topic
subject area addressed in paragraph A.9 below provides an expanded discussion on the
FAA AELS.) The FIRC represents an ideal venue to update the instructor on pilot
deviations, and to provide the attendee with the tools the attendee needs to convey
mitigation tactics to their students. While the FAA requires FIRC providers to present
pilot deviations as a core topic, they should also weave the theme of the flight instructor’s
role in reducing pilot deviations throughout the entire FIRC program.
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
Appendix A
A-6
A.6.1 Lesson Development. FIRC providers should develop this lesson to promote the
attendees’ understanding of the common causes of pilot deviations and present strategies
to avoid pilot deviations. This lesson should also include the common causal factors and
avoidance procedures for specific pilot deviations such as runway incursions. For
example, detailed investigations of runway incursions over the past decade have
identified three major areas (pilot errors) contributing to runway incursions. The first
major area leading to runway incursions is the failure of a pilot to comply with ATC
instructions; the second major area is a pilot’s lack of airport familiarity; and the third
major area is a pilot’s failure to adhere to standard operating procedures and industry best
practices. FIRC providers should also teach attendees the common challenges to pilots
that lead to runway incursions. Lack of pilot proficiency, inadequate preflight planning,
poor taxi procedures, distractions in the cockpit, loss of situational awareness (SA), and
the improper use of aircraft lights are all challenges that, if not properly managed, can
lead to a pilot deviation. Adverse weather, technology limitation, and complex airport
designs are additional challenges that contribute to pilot deviations such as runway
incursions. Training and procedures developed in compliance with FAA policies and
industry best practices reduce the likelihood of pilot deviations such as runway
incursions.
A.6.2 Teaching Strategies. FIRC providers should present strategies that attendees can use to
teach runway incursion avoidance. For example, consider the following steps:
A.6.2.1 Proficiency. Training and continuing education lead to proficiency.
Proficiency is an essential step that pilots can take to avoid runway incursion.
Recurrent training, including a flight to a towered airport with an experienced
flight instructor, is a good way to gain proficiency with airport operations and
to develop the required skills to avoid runway incursions.
A.6.2.2 Planning. Pilots should plan each flight before it takes place, even when
flying to a familiar airport. Conducting preflight planning for every flight
places a pilot in a better position to avoid incidents, accidents, and runway
incursions.
A.6.2.3 Procedures. GA pilots should use proper procedures to reduce the risk of an
incident or accident. To do so, GA pilots should develop and adhere to set
cockpit procedures based on regulatory requirements and industry best
practices. Progressive taxi instructions are an excellent mitigation strategy to
ensure compliance with taxi clearances, which is especially useful at
unfamiliar controlled airports and receiving progressive taxi instructions is an
effective strategy to prevent runway incursions.
A.6.2.4 Sterile Cockpit. A sterile cockpit is another procedural step that pilots should
take to reduce the risk of a runway incursion. A sterile cockpit means avoiding
all conversations and actions not related to flight during critical phases of
aircraft operations such as taxi, takeoff, and landings. Proper taxi procedures
should always include a distraction-free cockpit because distractions lead to
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
Appendix A
A-7
unintended consequences. Failure of pilots to follow ATC taxi instructions is
the number one cause of runway incursions.
A.6.2.5 SA. SA is another step that begins with preflight planning. Some pilots only
think of SA in terms of flight operations. So, they may maintain this mindset
when the aircraft is on the ground. Reframing SA to cover all phases of flight
is one more step in reducing pilot errors. To maintain SA, pilots should adopt
a heads-up attitude when taxiing. This industry best practice is also a step to
reduce the risk of an inadvertent runway incursion.
A.6.2.6 Aircraft Lights. Proper use of aircraft lights is an additional procedure that
GA pilots often overlook. Aircraft lights allow others to have some idea of the
pilot’s intentions. Proper use of the aircraft lights should be a defined element
in every pilot’s set procedures.
A.7 How to Make the Best Use of the FAA Safety Team (FAASTeam) and the Pilot
Proficiency Program (WINGS) in Your Program of Instruction. Flight instructors
have at their disposal a vast and totally free resource of personnel and tools to help them
better do their jobs both on the ground when conducting ground instruction, as well as in
the air during actual flight training. That resource is the FAASTeam. The FAASTeam is
coordinated through the FAA’s Safety Promotion Program Office (SPPO) and consists of
a network of FAASTeam Program Managers (FPM) throughout the United States.
A.7.1 The FAASTeam has joined forces with individuals and the aviation industry to create a
unified effort to reduce GA accidents and to foster and promote a positive safety culture
in the GA community. These collaborative partners include:
1. FAASTeam Members: individuals who make a conscious effort to promote aviation
safety and a positive safety culture;
2. FAASTeam Representatives (REP): aviation safety volunteers who wish to work
closely with FPMs to actively promote safety; and
3. FAASTeam Industry Members (FIM): companies or associations of people that have
a vested interest in aviation safety.
A.7.2 The FAASTeam’s website, https://www.faasafety.gov/, is the prime FAASTeam
education and communication tool. Flight instructors are highly encouraged to register
for an account, which is free. Registered users automatically receive email
announcements of local and national safety seminars and webinars held throughout the
country, and they can specify topics of interest for safety notices.
A.7.3 One of the many FAASTeam tools available to the instructor is the WINGS program.
The WINGS program is a structured, documented process. WINGS instructors are
expected to provide evaluation and training necessary to ensure airmen are proficient in
each element of each WINGS activity. WINGS instructors also seek to improve pilot
performance to better than certification standards require. WINGS offers three levels of
achievement: Basic, Advanced, and Master.
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
Appendix A
A-8
A.7.4 WINGS subjects are designed to target specific emphasis areas derived from accident
data and are delivered through personal contact with flight instructors as well as through
frequent live seminars and webinars given throughout the United States. Pilots attain and
maintain WINGS phases on a rolling basis based on very simple and easy to understand
requirements. Recordkeeping and verification are accomplished online; however,
WINGS applicants do not need internet access to participate. As has been in the past,
achievement of any level of the WINGS program will substitute for a flight review.
Flight instructors need to be aware of and conversant in how this program works and how
it and the many other resources available to them through the FAASTeam can benefit
both their clients and them.
A.7.5 Flight instructors can earn WINGS credit for completing a FIRC, and those who instruct
in the WINGS program can establish their flight instructor recent experience based on
WINGS instructional flight activities. Flight instructors can also increase their client pool
through delivery of WINGS post-certification proficiency training. For complete details,
please refer to Advisory Circular (AC) 61-91, WINGS—Pilot Proficiency Program. Also,
see sample lesson plans in Appendix B, References and Job Aids, Figure B-2, Sample
Lesson Plan: Safety Trends in GA, and Figure B-3, Sample Lesson Plan: How to Make
Use of the FAA Safety Team.
A.8 FAA Regulatory, Policy, and Publications Changes and Updates. Regulations,
policies, and aviation safety-related publications are continually changing, and part of the
job of the flight instructor is to keep themselves up to date to ensure that what they are
teaching their students is current and accurate. This can be difficult for flight instructors,
whether they are part-time weekend instructors with jobs elsewhere, or very busy fulltime instructors at flight schools with high activity levels. Nevertheless, this requirement
remains critically important because effective recurrent flight instructor training directly
relates to the quality of flight instruction provided to pilots and the furtherance of flight
safety. The FIRC offers an ideal opportunity for the flight instructor to learn about what
has been changing in the regulatory and policy areas that are so important in their
conduct of their profession. Therefore, the FAA expects all FIRCs to provide training of
pertinent developments that occurred since the attendee’s last established recent
experience. This, in turn, places an expectation on the FIRC provider to diligently
research and keep abreast of the dynamic regulatory and policy environment within
which the flight instructor and their students must operate. This, clearly, will necessitate
ongoing and often substantial revisions in their course materials. In many cases, providers
will have to revise material “on the fly” as policies and regulations change. The FAA
expects FIRC providers to immediately update their presentation materials to reflect
relevant changes in FAA regulations, FAA policies, and FAA safety-related publications
(e.g., FAA ACs and handbooks) to stay completely up to date at all times. The provider
may make such changes to this topic content without prior approval at any time, provided
such changes accurately reflect the current regulatory or policy state.
A.9 How to Conduct an Effective Instrument Proficiency Check (IPC) and Flight
Review. Flight instructors perform one of the most vital and influential roles in aviation.
Along with training applicants to become first-time pilots, these aviation educators
provide essential pilot evaluations and continuing training to ensure safe flight
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
Appendix A
A-9
operations. Flight instructors influence the entire GA safety culture. They are not only
responsible for pilots to meet aviation proficiency standards, but also bear responsibilities
for the safety of every passenger who entrusts their life to a pilot’s knowledge, skill, and
judgment. The FIRC provider’s role of providing continuing training to instructors is
crucial. For example, the continuing training provided by FIRCs to flight instructors
enables the flight instructor to conduct meaningful IPCs and flight reviews.
A.9.1 The IPC. The instrument flight instructor who administers the IPC described in
§ 61.57(d) must know how to conduct an IPC effectively. Providers should ensure that
flight instructors receive the level of continuing training necessary to meet this goal.
Airman Certification Standards (ACS) or practical test standards (PTS), as applicable, for
the instrument rating stipulates that the flight portion of an IPC must include certain
aeronautical tasks (required maneuvers) specific to instrument flying. All flight
instructors should know that the ACS or PTS guide (as applicable) contains this
information. The maneuvers and procedures selected for the IPC must include those
listed in the Rating Task Table in the current edition of the ACS or PTS guide, as
applicable (e.g., FAA-S-ACS-8C, Instrument Rating ‒ Airplane Airman Certification
Standards). The instrument instructor conducting the IPC should also know that the
instructor has the discretion to require any other maneuver(s) necessary to determine that
the pilot can safely operate under instrument flight rules (IFR) in a broad range of
conditions appropriate to the aircraft flown and the ATC environment selected. In any
case, the flight instructor should pay particular attention to those areas within the PTS
identified as “Special Emphasis.” New ACS replacement guides do not label “Special
Emphasis” areas, since all required tasks are emphasized.
A.9.2 The Flight Review. A flight review is a training event in which proficiency is evaluated.
Thus, it is a proficiency-based exercise wherein the airman is required to demonstrate the
safe exercise of the privileges of their pilot certificate. It can be considered an industrymanaged recurrent training program. All active pilots must receive some level of
recurrent training on a regular basis in order to continue to exercise their pilot privileges.
At a minimum, pilots may meet that requirement through a flight review, which must be
conducted at least every 24 calendar months, as established in § 61.56. However, the
FAA recommends that pilots complete a flight review as needed, not just once every
24 calendar months. The flight instructor typically conducts flight reviews. Many pilots
never encounter a flight instructor except for that every 24 calendar month requirement.
Some flight instructors consider the flight review a chore that they would rather not do
and are often unclear as to how to properly conduct one when they do. The instructor
should understand that the authority to conduct a flight review, and thereby allow a pilot
to continue to exercise their privileges as pilot, is a major responsibility and offers them
an opportunity to assess and enhance a pilot’s aviation skills, and thus contribute directly
to the safety of GA. Flight instructors should also understand that the flight review is not
to be construed or conducted as a test, that there is no pass or fail, and that it is intended
to be a learning experience. Flight reviews are not standalone programs of training that
are the same for every pilot. Each flight review is unique to the skills and experience
level of the pilot receiving the review. The instructor should be well versed in how to
quickly assess a pilot’s skills and experience and to fine-tune the review “on the fly” to
effectively confer new knowledge or to refine skills already possessed. Most pilots know
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
Appendix A
A-10
that a flight review requires a minimum of 1 hour of training on the ground and 1 hour of
flight training as provided by § 61.56(a). This may create an unrealistic expectation of
some pilots. Many pilots may not remember that § 61.56(a)(2) also requires that the
review must include “[a] review of those maneuvers and procedures that, at the discretion
of the person giving the review, are necessary for the pilot to demonstrate the safe
exercise of the privileges of the pilot certificate.” Each pilot has individual needs that
may easily require more time to resolve to satisfactorily complete a flight review. To
prevent unrealistic expectations, the instructor should address the minimum time
requirement and pilot proficiency requirement for a flight review before conducting it.
The flight instructor who conducts a flight review normally uses more than an hour on
the ground and an hour in the air to accomplish this in a useful way.
A.9.3 IPC and Flight Review Considerations. Flight instructors should possess a thorough
understanding of the requirements and process for conducting an IPC or flight review
when they agree to conduct one. They should also understand that FAA AELS directly
affects safety of flight. Instructors should know that regulations require pilots to meet and
maintain FAA AELS for all grades of pilot certificates issued under part 61. When a
flight instructor conducts a flight evaluation and/or flight training event, the instructor
should identify any pilot that does not demonstrate FAA AELS. In cases like this, the
instructor should provide a logbook entry for training received, advise the pilot of the
instructor’s finding, and notify their appropriate Flight Standards District Office (FSDO)
for further action. AC 60-28, FAA English Language Standard for an FAA Certificate
Issued Under 14 CFR Parts 61, 63, 65, and 10 7, provides information and guidance
regarding English language standards required by these 14 CFR parts. The 2018 revision
of AC 61-98, Currency Requirements and Guidance for the Flight Review and Instrument
Proficiency Check, included a new section on the FAA AELS. Flight instructors should
also know how to instantly formulate an effective plan of action that will make the
difference between a pointless exercise that only meets the regulatory requirements, and a
truly effective IPC or flight review. The pilot under review/evaluation should come away
knowing something they did not know before, possess a degree of skill they did not have
before, and meet proficiency standards required to conduct a safe flight. While the FAA
requires providers to present the IPC and flight review as a core topic, they should
emphasize the importance of the IPC, flight review, and instructor’s role in reducing GA
accidents throughout the entire FIRC program.
A.10 Ethics and Professionalism in the Role of the Flight Instructor. A professional is a
person who receives compensation for some unique knowledge or skill that they may
possess. Ethics has been defined as what a person does when no one is watching. The
mark of a quality professional is that the individual maintains the highest level of ethics
in everything they do, but most particularly in their professional field. This very much
applies to the flight instructor who, by virtue of the fact that the instructor receives
compensation for their skill and knowledge, is a professional. Professionals who hold
their field of endeavor in high esteem and who take pride in their accomplishments in
their chosen fields tend to maintain high ethical standards without even thinking about it.
It becomes an inherent quality when one takes pride in their work. Unfortunately, many
in the flight instructor community do not easily recognize their own accomplishments and
the critical role they play as instructors in the global world of aviation. This can be
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
Appendix A
A-11
particularly true of those instructors who see themselves as “only” instructing to build the
hours necessary to move on to the air carriers where they plan on flying “real” airplanes.
The typically poor wages often found in the field of flight instruction does not help the
perception of instructors’ professionalism. While not pervasive throughout the industry,
flight instructors and others involved in aviation should guard against this mindset. Flight
instructors represent the finest individuals in GA. They should be mindful of this fact and
of the responsibility that it entails. Flight instructors have the duty of fostering and
ensuring safety through careful and thoughtful training. For example, signing a flight
review endorsement in a pilot’s logbook, possibly for a friend, when not actually having
conducted one or having conducted only a cursory check is unethical. However, the
perception of the seriousness of such a poorly conceived event is largely dependent on
those self-perceived factors of ethics and professionalism. If the flight instructor has the
attitude that “it doesn’t really matter because I am moving on to the airlines anyway,”
then that instructor’s perception of this infraction will be very different than that of their
colleagues. Most flight instructors understand that flight instructing is an honorable
profession, even if temporary, and they take pride in their ability and authority to conduct
flight reviews. Instructors should always be mindful of their responsibility and duty to
maintain the highest ethical standards (to always do the “right thing”) and how those high
standards directly contribute to safety in GA, regardless of their future personal goals.
While providers are required to present ethics and professionalism as a core topic, they
should also weave this theme throughout the entire FIRC program.
A.11 How to Teach Pilots to Avoid LOC. Instructors should know that the GAJSC cited
aircraft LOC as the number one cause of GA fatalities from 2012 through 2021. The
General Aviation Accident Dashboard reports that 210 fatal GA accidents and 344 GA
fatalities occurred in the NAS during 2021. In-flight LOC, mainly stalls, accounted for
the largest number of GA fatal accidents. LOC refers to aircraft accidents that result from
situations in which a pilot should have maintained or regained aircraft control, but did
not. The overwhelming majority of GA accidents are avoidable. Flight instructors can
make a significant impact on reducing GA accidents by providing targeted mentoring and
training to pilots and students. FIRC presentations should include the following
information in their LOC lesson:
A.11.1 Training Accidents. Training accidents have occurred because the flight instructor and
trainee were not in agreement regarding manipulation of the flight controls. A
recommended three-step process of exchange includes a verbal handoff from the pilot
flying, verbal acceptance by the pilot taking over, and a verbal and visual confirmation
that the exchange has taken place by the pilot ceding control. The procedure to be used
for exchange of flight controls should be briefed before flight. In addition, instructors
need to maintain diligence while providing instruction. A flight instructor should always
be ready and in a position to take over control of the aircraft when doubt exists as to the
safe outcome of any flight operation or maneuver.
A.11.2 Traffic Pattern Operations. One area where pilots have experienced LOC accidents is
while maneuvering in an airport traffic pattern. In response, the FAA is asking FIRC
providers to focus on three traffic pattern issues. The first is the risk of a departure stall;
the second is the risk of LOC if attempting to return to the field after an engine failure on
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
Appendix A
A-12
takeoff; and the third is the risk of LOC on the base to final turn. The pilot’s ability to
avoid a stall is a factor in all three scenarios.
A.11.3 Departure. Flight instructors should provide training ensuring pilots of small, singleengine aircraft depart in coordinated flight at the best-rate-of-climb speed (VY) for
normal takeoffs and maintain this speed to the altitude necessary for a safe return to the
airport in the event of an emergency. Instructors should emphasize that a departure at
best-angle-of-climb speed (VX) is used only for obstacle clearance and short-field takeoff
procedures. Flight instructors should also emphasize the risks and potential consequences
of climbing out at speeds less or greater than what is required for a particular type of
takeoff.
A.11.4 Return to Field/Engine Failure on Takeoff. Flight instructors should demonstrate and
teach trainees when and how to make a safe 180-degree turnback to the field after an
engine failure. Instructors should also train pilots of single-engine airplanes not to make
an emergency 180-degree turnback to the field after a failure unless altitude, best glide
requirements, and pilot skill allow for a safe return. Instructors should also emphasize
that to return to the runway the pilot just took off from will require more than a
180-degree turn. This emergency procedure training should occur at a safe altitude and
should only be taught as a simulated engine-out exercise. A critical part of conducting
this training is for the flight instructor to be fully aware of the need for diligence, the need
to perform this maneuver properly, and the need to avoid any potential for an accelerated
stall in the turn. The flight instructor should demonstrate the proper use of pitch and bank
control to reduce load factor and lower the stall speed during the turn. After completing
this demonstration, the flight instructor should allow the trainee to practice this procedure
under the flight instructor’s supervision. Flight instructors should also teach the typical
altitude loss for the given make and model flown during a 180-degree turn, while also
teaching the pilot how to make a safe, coordinated turn with a sufficient bank. These
elements should give the pilot the ability to determine quickly whether a turnback will
have a successful outcome. During the before-takeoff check, the expected loss of altitude
in a turnback, plus a sufficient safety factor, should be briefed and related to the altitude
at which this maneuver can be conducted safely. In addition, the effect of existing winds
on the preferred direction and the viability of a turnback should be considered as part of
the briefing.
A.11.5 LOC/Base to Landing. Specialized flight training that emphasizes establishing and
maintaining a stabilized approach and landing also reduces the risk of LOC in an airport
traffic pattern. A properly executed base-to-final turn considers crosswinds and enables
pilots to begin final approach lined up with the intended runway’s extended centerline.
Instructors should instruct the pilot to reject an approach and initiate a go-around when
the pilot cannot maintain a stabilized approach.
A.11.6 Instrument Meteorological Conditions (IMC). Another area where pilots have
experienced LOC is while maneuvering in IMC. Vertigo or spatial disorientation has
been a significant factor in many aircraft upset accidents. The common result when a
non-instrument-rated pilot inadvertently continues flight into IMC is spatial
disorientation of the pilot and LOC of the aircraft. Pilots who are instrument rated, but
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
Appendix A
A-13
not instrument proficient, are also susceptible. Recovery from such a situation can be
nearly impossible. Additionally, instrument-rated pilots maneuvering in IMC that fail to
prioritize actions properly and utilize Crew Resource Management (CRM) may become
inattentive or distracted, thus losing SA, which too often can lead to an LOC.
A.11.7 Pilot Proficiency. Studies have shown that LOC is most likely to occur when pilots lack
proficiency. However, mitigation of this risk can be accomplished using personal
currency programs and proficiency training. Proficiency is essential when an unforeseen,
abnormal, or emergency situation presents itself. Conditions exceeding personal skill
limitations can present themselves at any time and can occur unexpectedly. When this
happens, the pilot needs to be able to avoid being startled, make appropriate decisions in
a timely manner, and exercise skills at a proficiency level needed to meet the situation.
Personal currency programs serve to develop and maintain pilot proficiency by
promoting attributes such as aeronautical knowledge, aeronautical skill, and ADM. Pilot
proficiency pays off because a highly proficient pilot can avoid or manage an in-flight
emergency in a routine, safe, and efficient manner. The GAJSC recommends that pilots
place emphasis focused on their specific proficiency needs by including training that may
exceed regulatory minimum currency requirements. FIRCs can use this information to
emphasize proficiency and training programs to reduce the risk of GA accidents. FIRC
providers should include awareness training for instructors to learn that the GAJSC is the
primary vehicle for government–industry cooperation, communication, and coordination
on GA accidents. A FIRC provider’s LOC lesson should emphasize that GAJSC findings
reveal common pilot errors leading to LOC, while GAJSC recommendations provide
appropriate antidotal actions to reduce LOC and GA accidents. This information includes
personal skill limitations, distractions, and spatial disorientation that lead to GA
accidents. The flight instructor’s awareness of this information can directly benefit the
effectiveness of student training. Trainees should understand that poor ADM, poor
weather conditions, runway incursions, and poor aeronautical skills hold the potential to
trigger LOC. The GAJSC is a vital contributor to the goal of reducing GA accidents.
Flight instructors should consider GAJSC findings and recommendations when
conducting flight reviews, IPCs, and instructing other pilots on creating their personal
currency action plans. AC 61-98 and the Airplane Flying Handbook (FAA-H-8083-3)
both include sections pertaining to LOC.
A.12 ACS. Since September 2011, the FAA has worked with aviation community stakeholders
to improve standards, guidance, and test development practices for airman certification.
The ACS framework integrates and aligns standards, guidance, and testing for airman
certification. The ACS is built on today’s PTS, which establishes the skill performance
metrics for each flight proficiency element listed in the regulations for an airman
certificate or rating. The ACS replaces the PTS when it is published. The ACS does not
change or lengthen the check ride (practical test). Rather, its integrated approach will
provide better guidance to applicants, instructors, and evaluators during each phase of the
airman certification process. The ACS also enables the FAA to keep airman testing fully
aligned with regulations, performance standards for knowledge and skill, and guidance
materials such as handbooks. Additionally, the FAA is working with industry to refine
ACS and its implementation plan. The rollout date for releasing the initial ACSs for
Private Pilot-Airplane (PAR) and Instrument Rating Airplane (IRA) was June 15, 2016.
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
Appendix A
A-14
On May 31, 2024, the FAA adopted a final rule to amend 14 CFR part 61 by
incorporating by reference (IBR) the ACS and PTS. This final rule incorporates thirty
pilot and flight instructor ACS and PTS in part 61 by reference through a centralized IBR
section in new § 61.14. To ensure that the implementation of the ACS is successful,
stakeholders need to understand how to utilize the ACS for training and testing. Flight
instructors play a leading role in this regard. For this reason, FIRC providers also need to
support the introduction of ACS and the 2024 ACS IBR by providing ACS training to
their attendees. Therefore, FIRC providers should develop a comprehensive lesson that
facilitates the understanding, implementation, and utilization of ACS. You can find more
information concerning ACS at https://www.faa.gov/training_testing/testing/acs/.
A.13 Flight Instructors: Accepting a Remote Pilot or Student Pilot Certificate
Application. Flight instructors need to understand that significant changes in the process
of applying for and issuing student pilot certificates took effect on April 1, 2016, in
conjunction with a new rule adopted by the FAA. Since April 1, 2016, Aviation Medical
Examiners (AME) are no longer able to issue student pilot certificates. The FAA has
released a final rule that requires student pilots to apply for a plastic student pilot
certificate from a FSDO, Designated Pilot Examiner (DPE), Airman Certification
Representative (ACR), or a flight instructor. Under the authority of the FAA, the 14 CFR
part 107 rules were enacted on August 29, 2016. Now, an aviation safety inspector (ASI),
DPE, ACR, or a flight instructor accepts remote pilot applications. AC 61-65,
Certification: Pilots and Flight and Ground Instructors, reflects these changes. This lesson
provides flight instructors training for their review and acceptance of an application for a
Student Pilot Certificate or an application for a Remote Pilot Certificate. This lesson
should provide training for the submission of both the Integrated Airman Certification
and Rating Application (IACRA) and the paper applications. This lesson should also
provide training to flight instructors regarding their responsibility to evaluate the
applicant’s eligibility for meeting FAA AELS. FIRC providers should develop a
comprehensive lesson to facilitate the flight instructor’s full understanding and
implementation of their new responsibilities regarding this topic.
• You can find more information concerning part 107 pilot certification at
https://www.faa.gov/uas/commercial_operators/become_a_drone_pilot.
• You can find more information concerning student pilot certification at
https://www.faa.gov/pilots/become/student_cert/.
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
Appendix B
B-1
APPENDIX B. REFERENCES AND JOB AIDS
B.1 FAA Advisory Circulars (AC) (current editions): https://www.faa.gov/regulations_pol
icies/advisory_circulars/.
• AC 60-28, FAA English Language Standard for an FAA Certificate Issued Under
14 CFR Parts 61, 63, 65, and 107.
• AC 61-65, Certification: Pilots and Flight and Ground Instructors.
• AC 61-91, WINGS—Pilot Proficiency Program.
• AC 90-109, Transition to Unfamiliar Aircraft, provides additional information and
guidance pertaining to transition to experimental or unfamiliar airplanes.
• AC 90-114, Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast Operations.
• AC 107-2, Small Unmanned Aircraft Systems (Small UAS).
B.2 FAA Handbooks and Manuals (current editions): https://www.faa.gov/regulations_po
licies/handbooks_manuals/.
• FAA-H-8083-3, Airplane Flying Handbook.
• FAA-H-8083-9, Aviation Instructor’s Handbook.
• Other handbooks and manuals, as applicable.
B.3 FAA Web Resources:
• Airman Certification Standards (ACS) (all current editions):
https://www.faa.gov/training_testing/testing/acs/.
• Beyond the Buttons: Mastering Our Marvelous Flying Machines:
https://www.faasafety.gov/files/gslac/library/documents/2007/Mar/15239/7.1%20TA
A%20Flying%20Skills%20MarApr07.pdf.
• FAA/Industry Training Standards: Personal and Weather Risk Assessment Guide:
https://www.faa.gov/sites/faa.gov/files/training_testing/training/fits/guidance/Pers%2
0Wx%20Risk%20Assessment%20Guide-V1.0.pdf.
• Flight Instructor Training Modules:
https://www.faa.gov/training_testing/training/fits/training.
• General Aviation Pilot’s Guide to Preflight Weather Planning, Weather SelfBriefings, and Weather Decision Making (current edition):
https://www.faasafety.gov/files/gslac/courses/content/33/346/GA%20Weather%20De
cision-Making%20Aug06.pdf.
• Online Resources for Certificated Flight Instructors, FAA Safety Team (FAASTeam):
https://www.faasafety.gov.
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
Appendix B
B-2
• Personal Minimums Checklist:
https://www.faa.gov/sites/faa.gov/files/training_testing/training/fits/guidance/persona
l%20minimums%20checklist.pdf.
• Practical Test Standards (PTS) (all current editions):
https://www.faa.gov/training_testing/testing/test_standards/.
• Risk Management Teaching Tips:
https://www.faasafety.gov/gslac/ALC/libview_normal.aspx?id=6107.
B.4 Other Resources:
• Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association (AOPA): http://www.aopa.org/.
• AOPA Tools for Certificated Flight Instructors: https://www.aopa.org/training-andsafety/cfis/flight-instructor-resources/tools-for-cfis.
• Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA): https://www.eaa.org/.
• Flight Service (Leidos): https://www.1800wxbrief.com/.
• General Aviation Manufacturers Association (GAMA): https://gama.aero/.
• National Association of Flight Instructors (NAFI): https://www.nafinet.org/.
• Society of Aviation and Flight Educators (SAFE): https://www.safepilots.org/.
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
Appendix B
B-3
Table B-1. Minimum Hour Assurance Plan Matrix
[Required to be included in an online training course outline (TCO)]
Example: 16-Hour Course Content
ASSURANCE PLAN MATRIX
CORE TOPICS
Lesson
Presentation
Actual Time
(LMS1
1 The provider’s learning management system (LMS) is required to ensure that each attendee actively engages each
lesson in its entirety.
)
Pretest
Allotted Time
(optional2
2 A pretest is a learning tool that may count as part of a lesson, but should not constitute an excessive amount of the
lesson time.
)
Lesson
Support
Graph/Data
Allotted Time3
3 This column is optional, as graphs/additional data may be included without a specified time for attendees to
review.
Allotted Break
Time4
4 Credited break time may not exceed 2 hours of the 16-hour course content.
End of Lesson
and/or Final Exam
Allotted Time5
5 Total testing time may not exceed 1 hour of the 16-hour course content minimum requirement
(see paragraph
Hours Minutes Minutes Minutes Minutes
Navigating the 21st
Century: Aircraft
Automation
1.0 0 0 Attendee
Discretion 4
Security-Related SUA 1.0 0 0 “ 4
TSA 1.0 0 0 “ 4
Culture of Safety 1.0 0 0 “ 4
Safety Trends in GA 1.0 0 .4 “ 5
Pilot Deviations .75 0 0 “ 4
FAASTeam .75 0 .3 “ 4
Regulations .75 0 0 “ 4
Flight Review & IPC .75 0 .3 “ 5
Ethics &
Professionalism .75 0 0 “ 4
Loss of Control (LOC) .75 0 0 “ 4
Airman Certification
Standards (ACS) .75 0 0 “ 4
Accepting a Remote
Pilot or Student Pilot
Certificate Application
.75 0 0 “ 4
ELECTIVE TOPICS6
6 Elective topics are encouraged, not required.
Who is GAJSC .5 0 0 “ 3
Teaching ADM .5 0 0 “ 3
Total Time (in Hours)
Actual
Hours
(LMS):
12
Allotted
Hours:
0
Allotted
Hours:
1.0
Allotted
Hours:
2.0
Allotted
Hours:
1.0
11.10.6).
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
Appendix B
B-4
Figure B-1. Sample Training Course Outline Cover Page
ORVILLE & WILBUR’S FIRC SCHOOL
Airplane Flight Instructor Refresher Course
Training Course Outline
(Live Classroom)
Conducted By:
Orville & Wilbur’s FIRC School
1234 Airport Road
Baltimore, MD 12345
Phone: (123) 456-7890
FAX: (123) 456-7891
Point of Contact:
John Smith, Chief Instructor
Phone: (123) 567-8901
Email: jsmith@yourfircschools.com
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
Appendix B
B-5
Figure B-2. Sample Lesson Plan: Safety Trends in GA
Safety Trends in GA:
How Flight Instructors Can Directly Contribute to Aviation Safety
Lesson presentation time: 45 minutes
LESSON OBJECTIVE
At the completion of this lesson, the attendee will (desired learning outcome):
• Be familiar with the latest General Aviation (GA) safety information & trends;
• Understand methods to mentor students in a way to build a GA culture of safety;
• Be able to teach more effectively by learning new instructional methods to teach risk management
(RM) principles that respond to current aviation safety trends in GA; and
• Know how to teach risk recognition, common pilot errors, and RM principles that will reduce GA
accidents.
SUBJECT MATTER ELEMENTS (examples)
• Latest aviation safety info: Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), National Transportation Safety
Board (NTSB), and Joseph T. Nall Report (include edition and/or dates of publication);
• All major trends including loss of control (LOC);
• Non-fatalities and fatalities trends by year;
• Analysis of trends and causes; and
• Takeaway from General Aviation Joint Safety Committee (GAJSC), NTSB findings, and
recommendations.
EQUIPMENT (optional)
• PowerPoint.
• Handouts.
• Whiteboard.
COMPLETION STANDARDS
Attendees will complete this lesson when:
• The lesson content is presented to, and is completed by, the attendee in its entirety;
• The attendee understands the lesson content and its application; and
• The attendee receives a score of no less than 70% on each of their exams.
TESTING PROCEDURE
End of first day and second day final exams: essay and multiple choice closed book.
10/30/24 AC 61-83K
Appendix B
B-6
Figure B-3. Sample Lesson Plan: How to Make Use of the FAA Safety Team
How to Make Use of the FAA Safety Team
Lesson presentation time: 45 minutes
LESSON OBJECTIVE
At the completion of this lesson, the attendee will:
• Be familiar with the FAA Safety Team (FAASTeam) mission, composition and philosophy;
• Understand how to register for an account on the FAASTeam website, https://www.faasafety.gov/;
• Understand how to access FAASTeam resources for General Aviation (GA) pilots and flight instructors;
• Be able to describe the Pilot Proficiency Program (WINGS), how to register for a WINGS account, and how
to validate WINGS training for pilots; and
• Be able to request WINGS credit for flight instructor refresher course (FIRC) completion
(Activity number A080530-01).
SUBJECT MATTER ELEMENTS
• FAASTeam composition:
• FAASTeam Program Managers (FPM).
• FAASTeam Representatives (REP).
• FAASTeam Members and FAASTeam Industry Members (FIM).
• FAASTeam Resources for Flight Instructors:
• FPMs and REPs.
• How to contact.
• FAASafety.gov:
• Account registration.
• Notification preferences.
• Resources:
• Notices.
• Safety Program Airman Notification System (SPANS).
• Activities and courses.
• Flight Risk Assessment Tools.
• WINGS:
• Program description and philosophy.
• Getting started with WINGS.
• FAASTeam seminars and webinars.
• FAASTeam Flight Instructor Forum.
• The FAASTeam and FAA’s Remedial Training Program:
• FAA Compliance Philosophy.
• Contact your FPM if you are interested in conducting remedial training.
EQUIPMENT (optional)
• PowerPoint.
• Handouts.
• Whiteboard.
COMPLETION STANDARDS
Attendees will complete this lesson when:
• The lesson content is presented to, and is completed by, the attendee in its entirety;
• The attendee understands the lesson content and its application; and
• The attendee receives a score of no less than 70% on each of their exams.
TESTING PROCEDURE
TBD by FIRC provider.
 Advisory Circular Feedback Form
If you find an error in this AC, have recommendations for improving it, or have suggestions
for new items/subjects to be added, you may let us know by contacting the General Aviation
and Commercial Division at 9-AFS-800-Correspondence@faa.gov or the Flight Standards
Directives Management Officer at 9-AWA-AFB-120-Directives@faa.gov.
Subject: AC 61-83K, Nationally Scheduled, FAA-Approved, Industry-Conducted Flight
Instructor Refresher Course
Date: _____________________
Please check all appropriate line items:
An error (procedural or typographical) has been noted in paragraph ____________
on page _______.
Recommend paragraph _____________ on page __________ be changed as follows:
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
In a future change to this AC, please cover the following subject:
(Briefly describe what you want added.)
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
Other comments:
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
I would like to discuss the above. Please contact me.
Submitted by: Date: ______________________
