This chapter discusses the factors that affect aircraft
performance, which include the aircraft weight, atmospheric
conditions, runway environment, and the fundamental
physical laws governing the forces acting on an aircraft.
Importance of Performance Data
The performance or operational information section of the
Aircraft Flight Manual/Pilot’s Operating Handbook (AFM/
POH) contains the operating data for the aircraft; that is, the
data pertaining to takeoff, climb, range, endurance, descent,
and landing. The use of this data in flying operations is
mandatory for safe and efficient operation. Considerable
knowledge and familiarity of the aircraft can be gained by
studying this material.
Performance
Chapter 11

Inches of
Mercury
Millibars
29.92"
Standard
Sea Level
Pressure
Hg
Standard
Sea Level
Pressure
mb
A t m o s p h e r i c  P r e s s u r e
Figure 11-1. Standard sea level pressure.
It must be emphasized that the manufacturers’ information
and data furnished in the AFM/POH is not standardized.
Some provide the data in tabular form, while others use
graphs. In addition, the performance data may be presented
on the basis of standard atmospheric conditions, pressure
altitude, or density altitude. The performance information in
the AFM/POH has little or no value unless the user recognizes
those variations and makes the necessary adjustments.
To be able to make practical use of the aircraft’s capabilities
and limitations, it is essential to understand the significance
of the operational data. The pilot must be cognizant of the
basis for the performance data, as well as the meanings of
the various terms used in expressing performance capabilities
and limitations.
Since the characteristics of the atmosphere have a major
effect on performance, it is necessary to review two dominant
factors—pressure and temperature.
Structure of the Atmosphere
The atmosphere is an envelope of air that surrounds the
Earth and rests upon its surface. It is as much a part of the
Earth as is land and water. However, air differs from land
and water in that it is a mixture of gases. It has mass, weight,
and indefinite shape.
Air, like any other fluid, is able to flow and change its shape
when subjected to even minute pressures because of the
lack of strong molecular cohesion. For example, gas will
completely fill any container into which it is placed, expanding
or contracting to adjust its shape to the limits of the container.
The atmosphere is composed of 78 percent nitrogen, 21
percent oxygen, and 1 percent other gases, such as argon
or helium. Most of the oxygen is contained below 35,000
feet altitude.
Atmospheric Pressure
Though there are various kinds of pressure, pilots are mainly
concerned with atmospheric pressure. It is one of the basic
factors in weather changes, helps to lift the aircraft, and
actuates some of the most important flight instruments in the
aircraft. These instruments often include the altimeter, the
airspeed indicator (ASI), the vertical speed indicator (VSI),
and the manifold pressure gauge.
Though air is very light, it has mass and is affected by the
attraction of gravity. Therefore, like any other substance, it
has weight; because it has weight, it has force. Since it is a
fluid substance, this force is exerted equally in all directions,
and its effect on bodies within the air is called pressure.
Under standard conditions at sea level, the average pressure
exerted by the weight of the atmosphere is approximately 14.7
pounds per square inch (psi). The density of air has significant
effects on the aircraft’s performance. As air becomes less
dense, it reduces:
Power, because the engine takes in less air
Thrust, because the propeller is less efficient in thin air
Lift, because the thin air exerts less force on the airfoils
The pressure of the atmosphere may vary with time but more
importantly, it varies with altitude and temperature. Due to
the changing atmospheric pressure, a standard reference
was developed. The standard atmosphere at sea level has
a surface temperature of 59 degrees Fahrenheit (°F) or 15
degrees Celsius (°C) and a surface pressure of 29.92 inches
of mercury ("Hg) or 1013.2 millibars (mb). [Figure 11-1]
A standard temperature lapse rate is one in which the
temperature decreases at the rate of approximately 3.5 °F or
2 °C per thousand feet up to 36,000 feet. Above this point,
the temperature is considered constant up to 80,000 feet. A
standard pressure lapse rate is one in which pressure decreases
at a rate of approximately 1 "Hg per 1,000 feet of altitude gain
to 10,000 feet. [Figure 11-2] The International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO) has established this as a worldwide
standard, and it is often referred to as International Standard
Atmosphere (ISA) or ICAO Standard Atmosphere. Any
temperature or pressure that differs from the standard lapse
rates is considered nonstandard temperature and pressure.
Adjustments for nonstandard temperatures and pressures are
provided on the manufacturer’s performance charts.

Altitude (ft)
Pressure
("Hg)
Temperature
(°C)
(°F)
7,000
9,000
11,000
13,000
15,000
16,000
17,000
18,000
19,000
20,000
29.92
28.86
27.82
26.82
25.84
24.89
23.98
23.09
22.22
21.38
20.57
19.79
19.02
18.29
17.57
16.88
16.21
15.56
14.94
14.33
13.74
15.0
13.0
11.0
9.1
7.1
5.1
3.1
1.1
−0.9
−2.8
−4.8
−6.8
−8.8
−10.8
−12.7
−14.7
−16.7
−18.7
−20.7
−22.6
−24.6
59.0
55.4
51.9
48.3
44.7
41.2
37.6
34.0
30.5
26.9
23.3
19.8
16.2
12.6
9.1
5.5
1.9
−1.6
−5.2
−8.8
−12.3
Figure 11-2. Properties of standard atmosphere.
Altimeter
setting
Altitude
correction
28.0
28.1
28.2
28.3
28.4
28.5
28.6
28.7
28.8
28.9
29.0
29.1
29.2
29.3
29.4
29.5
29.6
29.7
29.8
29.9
29.92
30.0
30.1
30.2
30.3
30.4
30.5
30.6
30.7
30.8
30.9
31.0
1,824
1,727
1,630
1,533
1,436
1,340
1,244
1,148
1,053
−73
−165
−257
−348
−440
−531
−622
−712
−803
−893
−983
Subtract
Add
To field
elevation
From field
elevation
To get
pressure altitude
Alternate Method for Determining
Pressure Altitude
Method for Determining
Pressure Altitude
Field elevation is sea level
Figure 11-3. Field elevation versus pressure. The aircraft is located
on a field that happens to be at sea level. Set the altimeter to the
current altimeter setting (29.7). The difference of 205 feet is added
to the elevation or a PA of 205 feet.
Since all aircraft performance is compared and evaluated
using the standard atmosphere, all aircraft instruments
are calibrated for the standard atmosphere. Thus, certain
corrections must apply to the instrumentation, as well as the
aircraft performance, if the actual operating conditions do
not fit the standard atmosphere. In order to account properly
for the nonstandard atmosphere, certain related terms must
be defined.
Pressure Altitude
Pressure altitude is the height above the standard datum
plane (SDP). The aircraft altimeter is essentially a sensitive
barometer calibrated to indicate altitude in the standard
atmosphere. If the altimeter is set for 29.92 "Hg SDP, the
altitude indicated is the pressure altitude—the altitude in the
standard atmosphere corresponding to the sensed pressure.
The SDP is a theoretical level at which the pressure of the
atmosphere is 29.92 "Hg and the weight of air is 14.7 psi. As
atmospheric pressure changes, the SDP may be below, at, or
above sea level. Pressure altitude is important as a basis for
determining aircraft performance, as well as for assigning
flight levels to aircraft operating at above 18,000 feet.
The pressure altitude can be determined by any of the three
following methods:
1. 	 By setting the barometric scale of the altimeter to
29.92 "Hg and reading the indicated altitude,
2. 	 By applying a correction factor to the indicated
altitude according to the reported “altimeter setting,”
[Figure 11-3]
3.    By using a flight computer
Density Altitude
The more appropriate term for correlating aerodynamic
performance in the nonstandard atmosphere is density
altitude—the altitude in the standard atmosphere
corresponding to a particular value of air density.
Density altitude is pressure altitude corrected for nonstandard
temperature. As the density of the air increases (lower
density altitude), aircraft performance increases. Conversely,

Outside air temperature (OAT)
Density altitude (feet)
15,000
13,000
11,000
9,000
7,000
13,000
11,000
9,000       Pressure altitude (feet)
7,000
-1,000
-2,000
-20°
-10°
10°
20°
30°
40°
0° 10° 20° 30° 40° 50° 60° 70° 80° 90° 100°
Standard temperature
Figure 11-4. Density altitude chart.
as air density decreases (higher density altitude), aircraft
performance decreases. A decrease in air density means a
high density altitude; an increase in air density means a lower
density altitude. Density altitude is used in calculating aircraft
performance. Under standard atmospheric condition, air at
each level in the atmosphere has a specific density; under
standard conditions, pressure altitude and density altitude
identify the same level. Density altitude, then, is the vertical
distance above sea level in the standard atmosphere at which
a given density is to be found.
Density altitude is computed using pressure altitude and
temperature. Since aircraft performance data at any level is
based upon air density under standard day conditions, such
performance data apply to air density levels that may not be
identical to altimeter indications. Under conditions higher
or lower than standard, these levels cannot be determined
directly from the altimeter.
Density altitude is determined by first finding pressure
altitude and then correcting this altitude for nonstandard
temperature variations. Since density varies directly with
pressure, and inversely with temperature, a given pressure
altitude may exist for a wide range of temperature by allowing
the density to vary. However, a known density occurs for
any one temperature and pressure altitude. The density of the
air, of course, has a pronounced effect on aircraft and engine
performance. Regardless of the actual altitude at which
the aircraft is operating, it will perform as though it were
operating at an altitude equal to the existing density altitude.
For example, when set at 29.92 "Hg, the altimeter may
indicate a pressure altitude of 5,000 feet. According to the
AFM/POH, the ground run on takeoff may require a distance
of 790 feet under standard temperature conditions. However,
if the temperature is 20 °C above standard, the expansion of
air raises the density level. Using temperature correction data
from tables or graphs, or by deriving the density altitude with
a computer, it may be found that the density level is above
7,000 feet, and the ground run may be closer to 1,000 feet.
Air density is affected by changes in altitude, temperature,
and humidity. High density altitude refers to thin air while
low density altitude refers to dense air. The conditions that
result in a high density altitude are high elevations, low
atmospheric pressures, high temperatures, high humidity, or
some combination of these factors. Lower elevations, high
atmospheric pressure, low temperatures, and low humidity
are more indicative of low density altitude.
Using a flight computer, density altitude can be computed by
inputting the pressure altitude and outside air temperature at
flight level. Density altitude can also be determined by referring
to the table and chart in Figures 11-3 and 11-4 respectively.
Effects of Pressure on Density
Since air is a gas, it can be compressed or expanded. When
air is compressed, a greater amount of air can occupy a
given volume. Conversely, when pressure on a given volume
of air is decreased, the air expands and occupies a greater
space. That is, the original column of air at a lower pressure

contains a smaller mass of air. In other words, the density is
decreased. In fact, density is directly proportional to pressure.
If the pressure is doubled, the density is doubled, and if the
pressure is lowered, so is the density. This statement is true
only at a constant temperature.
Effects of Temperature on Density
Increasing the temperature of a substance decreases its
density. Conversely, decreasing the temperature increases
the density. Thus, the density of air varies inversely with
temperature. This statement is true only at a constant pressure.
In the atmosphere, both temperature and pressure decrease
with altitude and have conflicting effects upon density.
However, the fairly rapid drop in pressure as altitude is
increased usually has the dominant effect. Hence, pilots can
expect the density to decrease with altitude.
Effects of Humidity (Moisture) on Density
The preceding paragraphs are based on the presupposition of
perfectly dry air. In reality, it is never completely dry. The
small amount of water vapor suspended in the atmosphere
may be negligible under certain conditions, but in other
conditions humidity may become an important factor in the
performance of an aircraft. Water vapor is lighter than air;
consequently, moist air is lighter than dry air. Therefore, as the
water content of the air increases, the air becomes less dense,
increasing density altitude and decreasing performance. It is
lightest or least dense when, in a given set of conditions, it
contains the maximum amount of water vapor.
Humidity, also called relative humidity, refers to the amount
of water vapor contained in the atmosphere and is expressed
as a percentage of the maximum amount of water vapor
the air can hold. This amount varies with the temperature;
warm air can hold more water vapor, while colder air can
hold less. Perfectly dry air that contains no water vapor has
a relative humidity of zero percent, while saturated air that
cannot hold any more water vapor has a relative humidity
of 100 percent. Humidity alone is usually not considered an
essential factor in calculating density altitude and aircraft
performance; however, it does contribute.
The higher the temperature, the greater amount of water
vapor that the air can hold. When comparing two separate air
masses, the first warm and moist (both qualities making air
lighter) and the second cold and dry (both qualities making
it heavier), the first must be less dense than the second.
Pressure, temperature, and humidity have a great influence
on aircraft performance because of their effect upon density.
There is no rule-of-thumb or chart used to compute the effects
of humidity on density altitude, but it must be taken into
consideration. Expect a decrease in overall performance in
high humidity conditions.
Performance
Performance is a term used to describe the ability of an
aircraft to accomplish certain things that make it useful for
certain purposes. For example, the ability of an aircraft to land
and take off in a very short distance is an important factor
to the pilot who operates in and out of short, unimproved
airfields. The ability to carry heavy loads, fly at high altitudes
at fast speeds, and/or travel long distances is essential for the
performance of airline and executive type aircraft.
The primary factors most affected by performance are the
takeoff and landing distance, rate of climb, ceiling, payload,
range, speed, maneuverability, stability, and fuel economy.
Some of these factors are often directly opposed: for example,
high speed versus short landing distance, long range versus
great payload, and high rate of climb versus fuel economy.
It is the preeminence of one or more of these factors that
dictates differences between aircraft and explains the high
degree of specialization found in modern aircraft.
The various items of aircraft performance result from the
combination of aircraft and powerplant characteristics. The
aerodynamic characteristics of the aircraft generally define
the power and thrust requirements at various conditions of
flight, while powerplant characteristics generally define the
power and thrust available at various conditions of flight.
The matching of the aerodynamic configuration with the
powerplant is accomplished by the manufacturer to provide
maximum performance at the specific design condition (e.g.,
range, endurance, and climb).
Straight-and-Level Flight
All of the principal components of flight performance involve
steady-state flight conditions and equilibrium of the aircraft.
For the aircraft to remain in steady, level flight, equilibrium
must be obtained by a lift equal to the aircraft weight and a
powerplant thrust equal to the aircraft drag. Thus, the aircraft
drag defines the thrust required to maintain steady, level
flight. As presented in Chapter 4, Aerodynamics of Flight,
all parts of an aircraft contribute to the drag, either induced
(from lifting surfaces) or parasite drag.
While parasite drag predominates at high speed, induced drag
predominates at low speed. [Figure 11-5] For example, if
an aircraft in a steady flight condition at 100 knots is then
accelerated to 200 knots, the parasite drag becomes four
times as great, but the power required to overcome that
drag is eight times the original value. Conversely, when the

Power required
Speed

Low cruise speed
Min. speed
High cruise speed
Maximu
m a
va
il
bl
po
wer
Maximum level flight speed
Figure 11-6. Power versus speed.
Drag
Speed
Total drag
Parasite drag
Stall
Induced drag
L/DMAX
Figure 11-5. Drag versus speed.
aircraft is operated in steady, level flight at twice as great a
speed, the induced drag is one-fourth the original value, and
the power required to overcome that drag is only one-half
the original value.
When an aircraft is in steady, level flight, the condition of
equilibrium must prevail. The unaccelerated condition of
flight is achieved with the aircraft trimmed for lift equal
to weight and the powerplant set for a thrust to equal the
aircraft drag.
The maximum level flight speed for the aircraft is obtained
when the power or thrust required equals the maximum power
or thrust available from the powerplant. [Figure 11-6] The
minimum level flight airspeed is not usually defined by thrust
or power requirement since conditions of stall or stability and
control problems generally predominate.
Climb Performance
If an aircraft is to move, fly, and perform, work must act
upon it. Work involves force moving the aircraft. The aircraft
acquires mechanical energy when it moves. Mechanical
energy comes in two forms: (1) Kinetic Energy (KE), the
energy of speed; (2) Potential Energy (PE), the stored energy
of position.
Aircraft motion (KE) is described by its velocity (airspeed).
Aircraft position (PE) is described by its height (altitude).
Both KE and PE are directly proportional to the object’s
mass. KE is directly proportional to the square of the object’s
velocity (airspeed). PE is directly proportional to the object’s
height (altitude). The formulas below summarize these
energy relationships:
KE = ½ × m × v2
m = object mass

v = object velocity

m = object mass
PE = m × g × h

g = gravity field strength

h = object height
We sometimes use the terms “power” and “thrust”
interchangeably when discussing climb performance. This
erroneously implies the terms are synonymous. It is important
to distinguish between these terms. Thrust is a force or
pressure exerted on an object. Thrust is measured in pounds
(lb) or newtons (N). Power, however, is a measurement of
the rate of performing work or transferring energy (KE and
PE). Power is typically measured in horsepower (hp) or
kilowatts (kw). We can think of power as the motion (KE
and PE) a force (thrust) creates when exerted on an object
over a period of time.
Positive climb performance occurs when an aircraft gains PE
by increasing altitude. Two basic factors, or a combination
of the two factors, contribute to positive climb performance
in most aircraft:
1. 	 The aircraft climbs (gains PE) using excess power
above that required to maintain level flight, or
2. 	 The aircraft climbs by converting airspeed (KE) to
altitude (PE).
As an example of factor 1 above, an aircraft with an engine
capable of producing 200 horsepower (at a given altitude)
is using only 130 horsepower to maintain level flight at that
altitude. This leaves 70 horsepower available to climb. The
pilot holds airspeed constant and increases power to perform
the climb.
As an example of factor 2, an aircraft is flying level at 120
knots. The pilot leaves the engine power setting constant but
applies other control inputs to perform a climb. The climb,
sometimes called a zoom climb, converts the airspeed (KE)

Thrust
Velocity (TAS)
Thrust
Velocity (TAS)
(Full PCL)
(Full Throttle)
L/D MAX
L/D MAX
TE
TE
TA
TA
TR
TR
LEGEND
TE
thrust

excess
TA
thrust

available
TR
thrust

required
AOC
angle of

climb
TAS
true

airspeed
L/D MAX  lift to drag

ratio

maximum
PCL
power

control lever
Max AOC (jet)
Max AOC (prop)
Figure 11-8. Comparison of maximum AOC between jet and propeller airplanes.
Altitude
Distance
Max AOC
Max ROC
Figure 11-7. Maximum angle of climb (AOC) versus maximum rate
of climb (ROC).
to altitude (PE); the airspeed decreases to something less
than 120 knots as the altitude increases.
There are two primary reasons to evaluate climb performance.
First, aircraft must climb over obstacles to avoid hitting
them. Second, climbing to higher altitudes can provide
better weather, fuel economy, and other benefits. Maximum
Angle of Climb (AOC), obtained at VX, may provide climb
performance to ensure an aircraft will clear obstacles.
Maximum Rate of Climb (ROC), obtained at VY, provides
climb performance to achieve the greatest altitude gain over
time. Maximum ROC may not be sufficient to avoid obstacles
in some situations, while maximum AOC may be sufficient
to avoid the same obstacles. [Figure 11-7]
Angle of Climb (AOC)
AOC is a comparison of altitude gained relative to distance
traveled. AOC is the inclination (angle) of the flight path. For
maximum AOC performance, a pilot flies the aircraft at VX
so as to achieve maximum altitude increase with minimum
horizontal travel over the ground. A good use of maximum
AOC is when taking off from a short airfield surrounded by
high obstacles, such as trees or power lines. The objective is
to gain sufficient altitude to clear the obstacle while traveling
the least horizontal distance over the surface.
One method to climb (have positive AOC performance) is
to have excess thrust available. Essentially, the greater the
force that pushes the aircraft upward, the steeper it can climb.
Maximum AOC occurs at the airspeed and angle of attack
(AOA) combination which allows the maximum excess
thrust. The airspeed and AOA combination where excess
thrust exists varies amongst aircraft types. As an example,
Figure 11-8 provides a comparison between jet and propeller
airplanes as to where maximum excess thrust (for maximum
AOC) occurs. In a jet, maximum excess thrust normally
occurs at the airspeed where the thrust required is at a
minimum (approximately L/DMAX). In a propeller airplane,
maximum excess thrust normally occurs at an airspeed below
L/DMAX and frequently just above stall speed.
Rate of Climb (ROC)
ROC is a comparison of altitude gained relative to the time
needed to reach that altitude. ROC is simply the vertical
component of the aircraft’s flight path velocity vector. For
maximum ROC performance, a pilot flies the aircraft at VY
so as to achieve a maximum gain in altitude over a given
period of time.
Maximum ROC expedites a climb to an assigned altitude.
This gains the greatest vertical distance over a period of
time. For example, in a maximum AOC profile, a certain
aircraft takes 30 seconds to reach 1,000 feet AGL, but
covers only 3,000 feet over the ground. By comparison,
using its maximum ROC profile, the same aircraft climbs

Power
Velocity (TAS)
Power
Velocity (TAS)
(Full PCL)
(Full Throttle)
L/D MAX
L/D MAX
PE
PA
PR
PA
PE
LEGEND
PE
power

excess
PA
power

available
PR
power

required
ROC
rate of

climb
TAS
true

airspeed
L/D MAX lift to drag

ratio

maximum
PCL
power

control lever
PR
Max ROC (jet)
Max ROC (prop)
Figure 11-9. Comparison of maximum ROC between jet and propeller airplanes.
to 1,500 feet in 30 seconds but covers 6,000 feet across the
ground. Note that both ROC and AOC maximum climb
profiles use the aircraft’s maximum throttle setting. Any
differences between max ROC and max AOC lie primarily
in the velocity (airspeed) and AOA combination the aircraft
manual specifies. [Figure 11-7]
ROC performance depends upon excess power. Since
climbing is work and power is the rate of performing work,
a pilot can increase the climb rate by using any power not
used to maintain level flight. Maximum ROC occurs at an
airspeed and AOA combination that produces the maximum
excess power. Therefore, maximum ROC for a typical jet
airplane occurs at an airspeed greater than L/DMAX and at an
AOA less than L/DMAX AOA. In contrast, maximum ROC for
a typical propeller airplane occurs at an airspeed and AOA
combination closer to L/DMAX. [Figure 11-9]
Climb Performance Factors
Since weight, altitude and configuration changes affect
excess thrust and power, they also affect climb performance.
Climb performance is directly dependent upon the ability to
produce either excess thrust or excess power. Earlier in the
book it was shown that an increase in weight, an increase in
altitude, lowering the landing gear, or lowering the flaps all
decrease both excess thrust and excess power for all aircraft.
Therefore, maximum AOC and maximum ROC performance
decreases under any of these conditions.
Weight has a very pronounced effect on aircraft performance.
If weight is added to an aircraft, it must fly at a higher AOA
to maintain a given altitude and speed. This increases the
induced drag of the wings, as well as the parasite drag of the
aircraft. Increased drag means that additional thrust is needed
to overcome it, which in turn means that less reserve thrust is
available for climbing. Aircraft designers go to great lengths
to minimize the weight, since it has such a marked effect on
the factors pertaining to performance.
A change in an aircraft’s weight produces a twofold effect
on climb performance. First, a change in weight changes the
drag and the power required. This alters the reserve power
available, which in turn, affects both the climb angle and
the climb rate. Secondly, an increase in weight reduces the
maximum ROC, but the aircraft must be operated at a higher
climb speed to achieve the smaller peak climb rate.
An increase in altitude also increases the power required
and decreases the power available. Therefore, the climb
performance of an aircraft diminishes with altitude. The
speeds for maximum ROC, maximum AOC, and maximum
and minimum level flight airspeeds vary with altitude. As
altitude is increased, these various speeds finally converge
at the absolute ceiling of the aircraft. At the absolute ceiling,
there is no excess of power and only one speed allows steady,
level flight. Consequently, the absolute ceiling of an aircraft
produces zero ROC. The service ceiling is the altitude at
which the aircraft is unable to climb at a rate greater than 100
feet per minute (fpm). Usually, these specific performance
reference points are provided for the aircraft at a specific
design configuration. [Figure 11-10]
The terms “power loading,” “wing loading,” “blade loading,”
and “disk loading” are commonly used in reference to
performance. Power loading is expressed in pounds per
horsepower and is obtained by dividing the total weight
of the aircraft by the rated horsepower of the engine. It
is a significant factor in an aircraft’s takeoff and climb
capabilities. Wing loading is expressed in pounds per square
foot and is obtained by dividing the total weight of an airplane
in pounds by the wing area (including ailerons) in square feet.
It is the airplane’s wing loading that determines the landing

Indicated airspeed (knots)
Standard altitude (feet)
Service ceiling
Absolute ceiling
Best angle
of climb (Vx)
Best rate
of climb (Vy)
24,000
22,000
20,000
18,000
16,000
Figure 11-10. Absolute and service ceiling.
Fuel flow/power required (HP)
Speed
Reference line
At a
ltitu
de
Maximum range at L/DMAX
Maximum endurance at
minimum power required
Applicable for a particular

Altitude

Configuration
Figure 11-11. Airspeed for maximum endurance.
A common element for each of these operating problems
is the specific range; that is, nautical miles (NM) of flying
distance versus the amount of fuel consumed. Range must
be clearly distinguished from the item of endurance. Range
involves consideration of flying distance, while endurance
involves consideration of flying time. Thus, it is appropriate
to define a separate term, specific endurance.
specific endurance =     flight hours
pounds of fuel
or
specific endurance =     flight hours/hour
        pounds of fuel/hour
or
specific endurance =        1
                                   fuel flow
Fuel flow can be defined in either pounds or gallons. If
maximum endurance is desired, the flight condition must
provide a minimum fuel flow. In Figure 11-11 at point A,
the airspeed is low and fuel flow is high. This would occur
during ground operations or when taking off and climbing.
As airspeed is increased, power requirements decrease due
to aerodynamic factors, and fuel flow decreases to point B.
This is the point of maximum endurance. Beyond this point,
increases in airspeed come at a cost. Airspeed increases
require additional power and fuel flow increases with
additional power.
Cruise flight operations for maximum range should be
conducted so that the aircraft obtains maximum specific range
throughout the flight. The specific range can be defined by
the following relationship.
speed. Blade loading is expressed in pounds per square foot
and is obtained by dividing the total weight of a helicopter by
the area of the rotor blades. Blade loading is not to be confused
with disk loading, which is the total weight of a helicopter
divided by the area of the disk swept by the rotor blades.
Range Performance
The ability of an aircraft to convert fuel energy into flying
distance is one of the most important items of aircraft
performance. In flying operations, the problem of efficient
range operation of an aircraft appears in two general forms:
1. 	 To extract the maximum flying distance from a given
fuel load
2. 	 To fly a specified distance with a minimum
expenditure of fuel

Power required
Speed
L/DMAX
Constant altitude
Hig
her
weig
ht
Low
er w
eight

Bas
ic w
eight
Figure 11-12. Effect of weight.
specific range =                  NM
pounds of fuel
or
specific range =                NM/hour
    pounds of fuel/hour
or
specific range =                 knots

fuel flow
If maximum specific range is desired, the flight condition
must provide a maximum of speed per fuel flow. While
the peak value of specific range would provide maximum
range operation, long-range cruise operation is generally
recommended at a slightly higher airspeed. Most long-range
cruise operations are conducted at the flight condition that
provides 99 percent of the absolute maximum specific range.
The advantage of such operation is that one percent of range
is traded for three to five percent higher cruise speed. Since
the higher cruise speed has a great number of advantages, the
small sacrifice of range is a fair bargain. The values of specific
range versus speed are affected by three principal variables:
1. 	 Aircraft gross weight
2. 	 Altitude
3. 	 The external aerodynamic configuration of the aircraft.
These are the source of range and endurance operating data
included in the performance section of the AFM/POH.
Cruise control of an aircraft implies that the aircraft is
operated to maintain the recommended long-range cruise
condition throughout the flight. Since fuel is consumed during
cruise, the gross weight of the aircraft varies and optimum
airspeed, altitude, and power setting can also vary. Cruise
control means the control of the optimum airspeed, altitude,
and power setting to maintain the 99 percent maximum
specific range condition. At the beginning of cruise flight, the
relatively high initial weight of the aircraft requires specific
values of airspeed, altitude, and power setting to produce the
recommended cruise condition. As fuel is consumed and the
aircraft’s gross weight decreases, the optimum airspeed and
power setting may decrease, or the optimum altitude may
increase. In addition, the optimum specific range increases.
Therefore, the pilot must provide the proper cruise control
procedure to ensure that optimum conditions are maintained.
Total range is dependent on both fuel available and specific
range. When range and economy of operation are the principal
goals, the pilot must ensure that the aircraft is operated at the
recommended long-range cruise condition. By this procedure,
the aircraft is capable of its maximum design-operating radius
or can achieve flight distances less than the maximum with
a maximum of fuel reserve at the destination.
A propeller-driven aircraft combines the propeller with the
reciprocating engine for propulsive power. Fuel flow is
determined mainly by the shaft power put into the propeller
rather than thrust. Thus, the fuel flow can be related directly
to the power required to maintain the aircraft in steady, level
flight, and on performance charts power can be substituted
for fuel flow. This fact allows for the determination of range
through analysis of power required versus speed.
The maximum endurance condition would be obtained at the
point of minimum power required since this would require the
lowest fuel flow to keep the airplane in steady, level flight.
Maximum range condition would occur where the ratio of
speed to power required is greatest. [Figure 11-11]
The maximum range condition is obtained at maximum lift/
drag ratio (L/DMAX), and it is important to note that for a given
aircraft configuration, the L/DMAX occurs at a particular AOA
and lift coefficient and is unaffected by weight or altitude. A
variation in weight alters the values of airspeed and power
required to obtain the L/DMAX. [Figure 11-12] Different
theories exist on how to achieve max range when there is a
headwind or tailwind present. Many say that speeding up in
a headwind or slowing down in a tail wind helps to achieve
max range. While this theory may be true in a lot of cases,
it is not always true as there are different variables to every
situation. Each aircraft configuration is different, and there
is not a rule of thumb that encompasses all of them as to how
to achieve the max range.

Power required
Speed
L/DMAX
Constant weight
Sea
 leve
l
At a
ltitu
de
Figure 11-13. Effect of altitude on range.
The variations of speed and power required must be
monitored by the pilot as part of the cruise control procedure
to maintain the L/DMAX. When the aircraft’s fuel weight is a
small part of the gross weight and the aircraft’s range is small,
the cruise control procedure can be simplified to essentially
maintaining a constant speed and power setting throughout
the time of cruise flight. However, a long-range aircraft has a
fuel weight that is a considerable part of the gross weight, and
cruise control procedures must employ scheduled airspeed
and power changes to maintain optimum range conditions.
The effect of altitude on the range of a propeller-driven
aircraft is illustrated in Figure 11-13. A flight conducted at
high altitude has a greater true airspeed (TAS), and the power
required is proportionately greater than when conducted at
sea level. The drag of the aircraft at altitude is the same as the
drag at sea level, but the higher TAS causes a proportionately
greater power required.
NOTE: The straight line that is tangent to the sea level power
curve is also tangent to the altitude power curve.
The effect of altitude on specific range can also be appreciated
from the previous relationships. If a change in altitude causes
identical changes in speed and power required, the proportion
of speed to power required would be unchanged. The fact
implies that the specific range of a propeller-driven aircraft
would be unaffected by altitude. Actually, this is true to the
extent that specific fuel consumption and propeller efficiency
are the principal factors that could cause a variation of
specific range with altitude. If compressibility effects are
negligible, any variation of specific range with altitude is
strictly a function of engine/propeller performance.
An aircraft equipped with a reciprocating engine experiences
very little, if any, variation of specific range up to its
absolute altitude. There is negligible variation of brake
specific fuel consumption for values of brake horsepower
below the maximum cruise power rating of the engine that
is the lean range of engine operation. Thus, an increase in
altitude produces a decrease in specific range only when the
increased power requirement exceeds the maximum cruise
power rating of the engine. One advantage of supercharging
is that the cruise power may be maintained at high altitude,
and the aircraft may achieve the range at high altitude with
the corresponding increase in TAS. The principal differences
in the high altitude cruise and low altitude cruise are the TAS
and climb fuel requirements.
Region of Reversed Command
The aerodynamic properties of an aircraft generally determine
the power requirements at various conditions of flight, while
the powerplant capabilities generally determine the power
available at various conditions of flight. When an aircraft
is in steady, level flight, a condition of equilibrium must
prevail. An unaccelerated condition of flight is achieved
when lift equals weight, and the powerplant is set for thrust
equal to drag. The power required to achieve equilibrium in
constant-altitude flight at various airspeeds is depicted on a
power required curve. The power required curve illustrates
the fact that at low airspeeds near the stall or minimum
controllable airspeed, the power setting required for steady,
level flight is quite high.
Flight in the region of normal command means that while
holding a constant altitude, a higher airspeed requires a higher
power setting and a lower airspeed requires a lower power
setting. The majority of aircraft flying (climb, cruise, and
maneuvers) is conducted in the region of normal command.
Flight in the region of reversed command means flight in
which a higher airspeed requires a lower power setting
and a lower airspeed requires a higher power setting to
hold altitude. It does not imply that a decrease in power
produces lower airspeed. The region of reversed command is
encountered in the low speed phases of flight. Flight speeds
below the speed for maximum endurance (lowest point
on the power curve) require higher power settings with a
decrease in airspeed. Since the need to increase the required
power setting with decreased speed is contrary to the normal
command of flight, the regime of flight speeds between the
speed for minimum required power setting and the stall speed
(or minimum control speed) is termed the region of reversed
command. In the region of reversed command, a decrease in
airspeed must be accompanied by an increased power setting
in order to maintain steady flight.
Figure 11-14 shows the maximum power available as a
curved line. Lower power settings, such as cruise power,
would also appear in a similar curve. The lowest point on

Power setting
Speed
Best endurance speed
Pow
er re
quire
Region of
reversed
command
Ma
xim
um
powe
r avail
able
Excess power
Figure 11-14. Power required curve.
the power required curve represents the speed at which the
lowest brake horsepower sustains level flight. This is termed
the best endurance airspeed.
An airplane performing a low airspeed, high pitch attitude
power approach for a short-field landing is an example
of operating in the region of reversed command. If an
unacceptably high sink rate should develop, it may be
possible for the pilot to reduce or stop the descent by applying
power. But without further use of power, the airplane would
probably stall or be incapable of flaring for the landing.
Merely lowering the nose of the airplane to regain flying
speed in this situation, without the use of power, would
result in a rapid sink rate and corresponding loss of altitude.
If during a soft-field takeoff and climb, for example, the pilot
attempts to climb out of ground effect without first attaining
normal climb pitch attitude and airspeed, the airplane may
inadvertently enter the region of reversed command at a
dangerously low altitude. Even with full power, the airplane
may be incapable of climbing or even maintaining altitude.
The pilot’s only recourse in this situation is to lower the pitch
attitude in order to increase airspeed, which inevitably results
in a loss of altitude.
Airplane pilots must give particular attention to precise
control of airspeed when operating in the low flight speeds
of the region of reversed command.
Takeoff and Landing Performance
The majority of pilot-caused aircraft accidents occur during
the takeoff and landing phase of flight. Because of this fact,
the pilot must be familiar with all the variables that influence
the takeoff and landing performance of an aircraft and must
strive for exacting, professional procedures of operation
during these phases of flight.
Takeoff and landing performance is a condition of
accelerated and decelerated motion. For instance, during
takeoff an aircraft starts at zero speed and accelerates to
the takeoff speed to become airborne. During landing, the
aircraft touches down at the landing speed and decelerates
to zero speed. The important factors of takeoff or landing
performance are:
The takeoff or landing speed is generally a function
of the stall speed or minimum flying speed.
The rate of acceleration/deceleration during the
takeoff or landing roll. The speed (acceleration and
deceleration) experienced by any object varies directly
with the imbalance of force and inversely with the
mass of the object. An airplane on the runway moving
at 75 knots has four times the energy it has traveling
at 37 knots. Thus, an airplane requires four times as
much distance to stop as required at half the speed.
The takeoff or landing roll distance is a function of
both acceleration/deceleration and speed.
Runway Surface and Gradient
Runway conditions affect takeoff and landing performance.
Typically, performance chart information assumes paved,
level, smooth, and dry runway surfaces. Since no two
runways are alike, the runway surface differs from one
runway to another, as does the runway gradient or slope.
[Figure 11-15]
Runway surfaces vary widely from one airport to another.
The runway surface encountered may be concrete, asphalt,
gravel, dirt, or grass. The runway surface for a specific
airport is noted in the Chart Supplement U.S. (formerly
Airport/Facility Directory). Any surface that is not hard
and smooth increases the ground roll during takeoff. This
is due to the inability of the tires to roll smoothly along the
runway. Tires can sink into soft, grassy, or muddy runways.
Potholes or other ruts in the pavement can be the cause of
poor tire movement along the runway. Obstructions such
as mud, snow, or standing water reduce the airplane’s
acceleration down the runway. Although muddy and wet
surface conditions can reduce friction between the runway
and the tires, they can also act as obstructions and reduce
the landing distance. [Figure 11-16] Braking effectiveness
is another consideration when dealing with various runway
types. The condition of the surface affects the braking ability
of the aircraft.
The amount of power that is applied to the brakes without
skidding the tires is referred to as braking effectiveness.
Ensure that runways are adequate in length for takeoff
acceleration and landing deceleration when less than ideal
surface conditions are being reported.

Figure 11-16. An aircraft’s performance during takeoff depends greatly on the runway surface.
Figure 11-15. Takeoff distance chart.
The gradient or slope of the runway is the amount of change
in runway height over the length of the runway. The gradient
is expressed as a percentage, such as a 3 percent gradient. This
means that for every 100 feet of runway length, the runway
height changes by 3 feet. A positive gradient indicates the
runway height increases, and a negative gradient indicates the
runway decreases in height. An upsloping runway impedes
acceleration and results in a longer ground run during takeoff.
However, landing on an upsloping runway typically reduces
the landing roll. A downsloping runway aids in acceleration
on takeoff resulting in shorter takeoff distances. The opposite
is true when landing, as landing on a downsloping runway
increases landing distances. Runway slope information is
contained in the Chart Supplement U.S. (formerly Airport/
Facility Directory). [Figure 11-17]
Water on the Runway and Dynamic Hydroplaning
Water on the runways reduces the friction between the tires
and the ground and can reduce braking effectiveness. The
ability to brake can be completely lost when the tires are
hydroplaning because a layer of water separates the tires from
the runway surface. This is also true of braking effectiveness
when runways are covered in ice.
When the runway is wet, the pilot may be confronted with
dynamic hydroplaning. Dynamic hydroplaning is a condition
in which the aircraft tires ride on a thin sheet of water rather
than on the runway’s surface. Because hydroplaning wheels
are not touching the runway, braking and directional control
are almost nil. To help minimize dynamic hydroplaning,
some runways are grooved to help drain off water; most
runways are not.

Figure 11-18. Tire pressure.
9 x     Tire pressure (in psi)
9 x 6 = 54 knots
36 = 6
Minimum dynamic hydroplaning speed (rounded off) =
Figure 11-17. Chart Supplement U.S. (formerly Airport/Facility Directory) information.
Airport name
Runway slope and direction of slope
Runway surface
Runway
Tire pressure is a factor in dynamic hydroplaning. Using
the simple formula in Figure 11-18, a pilot can calculate
the minimum speed, in knots, at which hydroplaning begins.
In plain language, the minimum hydroplaning speed is
determined by multiplying the square root of the main gear
tire pressure in psi by nine. For example, if the main gear tire
pressure is at 36 psi, the aircraft would begin hydroplaning
at 54 knots.
Landing at higher than recommended touchdown speeds
exposes the aircraft to a greater potential for hydroplaning.
And once hydroplaning starts, it can continue well below the
minimum initial hydroplaning speed.
On wet runways, directional control can be maximized
by landing into the wind. Abrupt control inputs should be
avoided. When the runway is wet, anticipate braking problems
well before landing and be prepared for hydroplaning. Opt for
a suitable runway most aligned with the wind. Mechanical
braking may be ineffective, so aerodynamic braking should
be used to its fullest advantage.
Takeoff Performance
The minimum takeoff distance is of primary interest in
the operation of any aircraft because it defines the runway
requirements. The minimum takeoff distance is obtained by
taking off at some minimum safe speed that allows sufficient
margin above stall and provides satisfactory control and
initial ROC. Generally, the lift-off speed is some fixed
percentage of the stall speed or minimum control speed for
the aircraft in the takeoff configuration. As such, the lift-off is
accomplished at some particular value of lift coefficient and
AOA. Depending on the aircraft characteristics, the lift-off
speed is anywhere from 1.05 to 1.25 times the stall speed or
minimum control speed.
To obtain minimum takeoff distance at the specific lift-off
speed, the forces that act on the aircraft must provide the
maximum acceleration during the takeoff roll. The various
forces acting on the aircraft may or may not be under the
control of the pilot, and various procedures may be necessary
in certain aircraft to maintain takeoff acceleration at the
highest value.
The powerplant thrust is the principal force to provide the
acceleration and, for minimum takeoff distance, the output
thrust should be at a maximum. Lift and drag are produced
as soon as the aircraft has speed, and the values of lift and
drag depend on the AOA and dynamic pressure.

Figure 11-19.  Effect of wind on takeoff and landing.
Percent increase
in takeoff or
landing distance
Percent decrease
in takeoff or
landing distance
Ratio of wind
velocity to takeoff
or landing speed
Headwind
Tailwind
Reference line
 30%
    20%
   10%

10%
   20%       30%
Ratio of wind
velocity to takeoff
or landing speed
As discussed in Chapter 6, engine pressure ratio (EPR) is the
ratio between exhaust pressure (jet blast) and inlet (static)
pressure on a turbo jet or turbo fan engine. An EPR gauge
tells the pilot how much power the engines are generating.
The higher the EPR, the higher the engine thrust. EPR is
used to avoid over-boosting an engine and to set takeoff and
go around power if needed. This information is important to
know before taking off as it helps determine the performance
of the aircraft.
In addition to the important factors of proper procedures,
many other variables affect the takeoff performance of an
aircraft. Any item that alters the takeoff speed or acceleration
rate during the takeoff roll affects the takeoff distance.
For example, the effect of gross weight on takeoff distance
is significant, and proper consideration of this item must be
made in predicting the aircraft’s takeoff distance. Increased
gross weight can be considered to produce a threefold effect
on takeoff performance:
1. 	 Higher lift-off speed
2. 	 Greater mass to accelerate
3. 	 Increased retarding force (drag and ground friction)
If the gross weight increases, a greater speed is necessary to
produce the greater lift necessary to get the aircraft airborne
at the takeoff lift coefficient. As an example of the effect of
a change in gross weight, a 21 percent increase in takeoff
weight requires a 10 percent increase in lift-off speed to
support the greater weight.
A change in gross weight changes the net accelerating force
and changes the mass that is being accelerated. If the aircraft
has a relatively high thrust-to-weight ratio, the change in the
net accelerating force is slight and the principal effect on
acceleration is due to the change in mass.
For example, a 10 percent increase in takeoff gross weight
would cause:
A 5 percent increase in takeoff velocity
At least a 9 percent decrease in rate of acceleration
At least a 21 percent increase in takeoff distance
With ISA conditions, increasing the takeoff weight of the
average Cessna 182 from 2,400 pounds to 2,700 pounds (11
percent increase) results in an increased takeoff distance from
440 feet to 575 feet (23 percent increase).
For the aircraft with a high thrust-to-weight ratio, the increase
in takeoff distance might be approximately 21 to 22 percent,
but for the aircraft with a relatively low thrust-to-weight
ratio, the increase in takeoff distance would be approximately
25 to 30 percent. Such a powerful effect requires proper
consideration of gross weight in predicting takeoff distance.
The effect of wind on takeoff distance is large, and proper
consideration must also be provided when predicting takeoff
distance. The effect of a headwind is to allow the aircraft to
reach the lift-off speed at a lower groundspeed, while the
effect of a tailwind is to require the aircraft to achieve a
greater groundspeed to attain the lift-off speed.
A headwind that is 10 percent of the takeoff airspeed reduces
the takeoff distance approximately 19 percent. However, a
tailwind that is 10 percent of the takeoff airspeed increases
the takeoff distance approximately 21 percent. In the case
where the headwind speed is 50 percent of the takeoff speed,
the takeoff distance would be approximately 25 percent of
the zero wind takeoff distance (75 percent reduction).
The effect of wind on landing distance is identical to its
effect on takeoff distance. Figure 11-19 illustrates the general
effect of wind by the percent change in takeoff or landing
distance as a function of the ratio of wind velocity to takeoff
or landing speed.
The effect of proper takeoff speed is especially important
when runway lengths and takeoff distances are critical. The
takeoff speeds specified in the AFM/POH are generally
the minimum safe speeds at which the aircraft can become
airborne. Any attempt to take off below the recommended
speed means that the aircraft could stall, be difficult to
control, or have a very low initial ROC. In some cases, an

excessive AOA may not allow the aircraft to climb out of
ground effect. On the other hand, an excessive airspeed at
takeoff may improve the initial ROC and “feel” of the aircraft
but produces an undesirable increase in takeoff distance.
Assuming that the acceleration is essentially unaffected, the
takeoff distance varies with the square of the takeoff velocity.
Thus, ten percent excess airspeed would increase the takeoff
distance 21 percent. In most critical takeoff conditions, such
an increase in takeoff distance would be prohibitive, and the
pilot must adhere to the recommended takeoff speeds.
The effect of pressure altitude and ambient temperature
is to define the density altitude and its effect on takeoff
performance. While subsequent corrections are appropriate
for the effect of temperature on certain items of powerplant
performance, density altitude defines specific effects on
takeoff performance. An increase in density altitude can
produce a twofold effect on takeoff performance:
1. 	 Greater takeoff speed
2. 	 Decreased thrust and reduced net accelerating force
If an aircraft of given weight and configuration is operated at
greater heights above standard sea level, the aircraft requires
the same dynamic pressure to become airborne at the takeoff
lift coefficient. Thus, the aircraft at altitude takes off at the
same indicated airspeed (IAS) as at sea level, but because of
the reduced air density, the TAS is greater.
The effect of density altitude on powerplant thrust depends
much on the type of powerplant. An increase in altitude
above standard sea level brings an immediate decrease in
power output for the unsupercharged reciprocating engine.
However, an increase in altitude above standard sea level does
not cause a decrease in power output for the supercharged
reciprocating engine until the altitude exceeds the critical
operating altitude. For those powerplants that experience
a decay in thrust with an increase in altitude, the effect
on the net accelerating force and acceleration rate can be
approximated by assuming a direct variation with density.
Actually, this assumed variation would closely approximate
the effect on aircraft with high thrust-to-weight ratios.
Proper accounting of pressure altitude and temperature is
mandatory for accurate prediction of takeoff roll distance.
The most critical conditions of takeoff performance are the
result of some combination of high gross weight, altitude,
temperature, and unfavorable wind. In all cases, the pilot
must make an accurate prediction of takeoff distance from
the performance data of the AFM/POH, regardless of the
runway available, and strive for a polished, professional
takeoff procedure.

In the prediction of takeoff distance from the AFM/POH
data, the following primary considerations must be given:
Pressure altitude and temperature—to define the effect
of density altitude on distance
Gross weight—a large effect on distance
Wind—a large effect due to the wind or wind
component along the runway
Runway slope and condition—the effect of an incline
and retarding effect of factors such as snow or ice
Landing Performance
In many cases, the landing distance of an aircraft defines the
runway requirements for flight operations. The minimum
landing distance is obtained by landing at some minimum safe
speed, that allows sufficient margin above stall and provides
satisfactory control and capability for a go-around. Generally,
the landing speed is some fixed percentage of the stall speed
or minimum control speed for the aircraft in the landing
configuration. As such, the landing is accomplished at some
particular value of lift coefficient and AOA. The exact values
depend on the aircraft characteristics but, once defined, the
values are independent of weight, altitude, and wind.
To obtain minimum landing distance at the specified landing
speed, the forces that act on the aircraft must provide
maximum deceleration during the landing roll. The forces
acting on the aircraft during the landing roll may require
various procedures to maintain landing deceleration at the
peak value.
A distinction should be made between the procedures for
minimum landing distance and an ordinary landing roll
with considerable excess runway available. Minimum
landing distance is obtained by creating a continuous peak
deceleration of the aircraft; that is, extensive use of the brakes
for maximum deceleration. On the other hand, an ordinary
landing roll with considerable excess runway may allow
extensive use of aerodynamic drag to minimize wear and tear
on the tires and brakes. If aerodynamic drag is sufficient to
cause deceleration, it can be used in deference to the brakes
in the early stages of the landing roll (i.e., brakes and tires
suffer from continuous hard use, but aircraft aerodynamic
drag is free and does not wear out with use). The use of
aerodynamic drag is applicable only for deceleration to 60
or 70 percent of the touchdown speed. At speeds less than
60 to 70 percent of the touchdown speed, aerodynamic drag
is so slight as to be of little use, and braking must be utilized
to produce continued deceleration. Since the objective during
the landing roll is to decelerate, the powerplant thrust should
be the smallest possible positive value (or largest possible
negative value in the case of thrust reversers).

In addition to the important factors of proper procedures,
many other variables affect the landing performance. Any
item that alters the landing speed or deceleration rate during
the landing roll affects the landing distance.
The effect of gross weight on landing distance is one of the
principal items determining the landing distance. One effect
of an increased gross weight is that a greater speed is required
to support the aircraft at the landing AOA and lift coefficient.
For an example of the effect of a change in gross weight, a
21 percent increase in landing weight requires a ten percent
increase in landing speed to support the greater weight.
When minimum landing distances are considered, braking
friction forces predominate during the landing roll and, for
the majority of aircraft configurations, braking friction is the
main source of deceleration.
The minimum landing distance varies in direct proportion
to the gross weight. For example, a ten percent increase in
gross weight at landing would cause a:
Five percent increase in landing velocity
Ten percent increase in landing distance
A contingency of this is the relationship between weight and
braking friction force.
The effect of wind on landing distance is large and deserves
proper consideration when predicting landing distance. Since
the aircraft lands at a particular airspeed independent of the
wind, the principal effect of wind on landing distance is
the change in the groundspeed at which the aircraft touches
down. The effect of wind on deceleration during the landing
is identical to the effect on acceleration during the takeoff.
The effect of pressure altitude and ambient temperature is to
define density altitude and its effect on landing performance.
An increase in density altitude increases the landing speed
but does not alter the net retarding force. Thus, the aircraft
at altitude lands at the same IAS as at sea level but, because
of the reduced density, the TAS is greater. Si
