It is important for a pilot to be aware of the mental and
physical standards required for the type of flying performed.
This chapter provides information on medical certification and
on a variety of aeromedical factors related to flight activities.
Aeromedical
Factors
Chapter 17

Obtaining a Medical Certificate
Most pilots must have a valid medical certificate to exercise
the privileges of their airman certificates. Glider and free
balloon pilots are not required to hold a medical certificate.
Sport pilots may hold either a medical certificate or a valid
state driver’s license. Regardless of whether a medical
certificate or drivers license is required, 14 CFR 61.53
requires every pilot not to act as a crewmember if they know,
or have reason to know, of any medical condition that would
make them unable to operate the aircraft in a safe manner.
Acquisition of a medical certificate requires an examination
by an aviation medical examiner (AME), a physician
with training in aviation medicine designated by the Civil
Aerospace Medical Institute (CAMI). There are three classes
of medical certificates. The class of certificate needed
depends on the type of flying the pilot plans to perform.
A third-class medical certificate is required for a private or
recreational pilot certificate. It is valid for 5 years for those
individuals who have not reached the age of 40; otherwise it
is valid for 2 years. A commercial pilot certificate requires at
least a second-class medical certificate, which is valid for 1
year. First-class medical certificates are required for airline
transport pilots and are valid for one year if the airman is 40
or younger; 40 and older it is valid for 6 months.
The standards are more rigorous for the higher classes of
certificates. A pilot with a higher class medical certificate
has met the requirements for the lower classes as well. Since
the required medical class applies only when exercising the
privileges of the pilot certificate for which it is required, a
first-class medical certificate would be valid for 1 year if
exercising the privileges of a commercial certificate and 2 or 5
years, as appropriate, for exercising the privileges of a private
or recreational certificate. The same applies for a second-class
medical certificate. The standards for medical certification
are contained in Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations
(14 CFR) part 67 and the requirements for obtaining medical
certificates can be found in 14 CFR part 61.
Students who have physical limitations, such as impaired
vision, loss of a limb, or hearing impairment may be issued
a medical certificate valid for “student pilot privileges only”
while learning to fly. Pilots with disabilities may require
special equipment to be installed in the aircraft, such as
hand controls for pilots with paraplegia. Some disabilities
necessitate a limitation on the individual’s certificate; for
example, impaired hearing would require the limitation
“not valid for flight requiring the use of radio.” When all the
knowledge, experience, and proficiency requirements have
been met and a student can demonstrate the ability to operate
the aircraft with the normal level of safety, a “statement of
demonstrated ability” (SODA) can be issued. This waiver,
or SODA, is valid as long as the physical impairment does
not worsen. Contact the local Flight Standards District Office
(FSDO) for more information on this subject.
The FAA medical standards, 14 CFR part 67, specify fifteen
medical conditions that are considered disqualifying by
“history or clinical diagnosis.” Regardless of when one of
these conditions was diagnosed and treated, an airman may
not be issued a medical certificate except through a process
called a “Special Issuance Authorization,” as explained
in 14 CFR part 67, section 67.401. A special issuance is a
discretionary issuance by the FAA Federal Air Surgeon and
requires satisfactory completion of special testing determined
by the FAA to demonstrate that an airman is safe to fly for
the duration of the medical certificate issued. The specific
disqualifying conditions include:
Diabetes mellitus requiring oral hypoglycemic
medication or insulin
Angina pectoris
Coronary heart disease that has been treated or, if
untreated, that has been symptomatic or clinically
significant
Myocardial infarction
Cardiac valve replacement
Permanent cardiac pacemaker
Heart replacement
Psychosis
Bipolar disorder
Personality disorder that is severe enough to have
repeatedly manifested itself by overt acts
Substance dependence (including alcohol)
Substance abuse
Epilepsy
Disturbance of consciousness and without satisfactory
explanation of cause
Transient loss of control of nervous system function(s)
without satisfactory explanation of cause
However, this list includes only the mandatory disqualifying
conditions. There are many other medical conditions that fall
into the General Medical Condition section of the regulations
that are considered by the FAA to be disqualifying even
though they are not stated in the regulations. Conditions
such as cancer, kidney stones, neurologic and neuromuscular
conditions including Parkinson’s disease and multiple
sclerosis, certain blood disorders, and other conditions that

may progress over time require review by the FAA before a
medical certificate may be issued.
The important thing to remember is that with very few
exceptions, all disqualifying medical conditions may
be considered for special issuance. If you can present
satisfactory medical documentation to the FAA that your
condition is stable, the chances are good that you will be
able to qualify for an Authorization.
Health and Physiological Factors
Affecting Pilot Performance
A number of health factors and physiological effects can be
linked to flying. Some are minor, while others are important
enough to require special attention to ensure safety of flight.
In some cases, physiological factors can lead to inflight
emergencies. Some important medical factors that a pilot
should be aware of include hypoxia, hyperventilation,
middle ear and sinus problems, spatial disorientation, motion
sickness, carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning, stress and
fatigue, dehydration, and heatstroke. Other subjects include
the effects of alcohol and drugs, anxiety, and excess nitrogen
in the blood after scuba diving.
Hypoxia
Hypoxia means “reduced oxygen” or “not enough oxygen.”
Although any tissue will die if deprived of oxygen long
enough, the greatest concern regarding hypoxia during
flight is lack of oxygen to the brain, since it is particularly
vulnerable to oxygen deprivation. Any reduction in mental
function while flying can result in life-threatening errors.
Hypoxia can be caused by several factors, including an
insufficient supply of oxygen, inadequate transportation of
oxygen, or the inability of the body tissues to use oxygen.
The forms of hypoxia are based on their causes:
Hypoxic hypoxia
Hypemic hypoxia
Stagnant hypoxia
Histotoxic hypoxia
Hypoxic Hypoxia
Hypoxic hypoxia is a result of insufficient oxygen available
to the body as a whole. A blocked airway and drowning
are obvious examples of how the lungs can be deprived of
oxygen, but the reduction in partial pressure of oxygen at high
altitude is an appropriate example for pilots. Although the
percentage of oxygen in the atmosphere is constant, its partial
pressure decreases proportionately as atmospheric pressure
decreases. As an aircraft ascends during flight, the percentage
of each gas in the atmosphere remains the same, but there are
fewer molecules available at the pressure required for them
to pass between the membranes in the respiratory system.
This decrease in number of oxygen molecules at sufficient
pressure can lead to hypoxic hypoxia.
Dangers of Transporting Dry Ice
Sublimation is a process in which a substance transitions
from a solid to a gaseous state without passing through
an intermediate liquid state. Dry ice sublimates into large
quantities of CO2 gas, which can rapidly displace oxygencontaining air and potentially cause hypoxia via carbon
dioxide intoxication. Case studies have shown that both illness
and death can be caused by occupational and/or unintentional
exposure when transporting dry ice in small, confined
spaces such as a flightdeck or airplane. Exposure to high
concentration of CO2 gas may lead to increased respiration,
tachycardia, cardiac arrhythmia, and unconsciousness.
Exposure to concentration of CO2 gas in excess of 10 percent
may cause convulsions, coma, and/or death.
The tendency of dry ice to rapidly sublimate also means that
without proper ventilation, it can rapidly pressurize. For
this reason, dry ice should never be placed inside a sealed
transport container (i.e., leak-proof secondary container)
and must be placed within an outer shipping container or
storage container that allows adequate ventilation to release
the CO2 gas and avoid pressurization. Sealing dry ice within a
leak-proof container may result in explosion of the container
potentially leading to serious physical injury or death.
Hypemic Hypoxia
Hypemic hypoxia occurs when the blood is not able to take
up and transport a sufficient amount of oxygen to the cells
in the body. Hypemic means “not enough blood.” This type
of hypoxia is a result of oxygen deficiency in the blood,
rather than a lack of inhaled oxygen, and can be caused by
a variety of factors. It may be due to reduced blood volume
(from severe bleeding), or it may result from certain blood
diseases, such as anemia. More often, hypemic hypoxia
occurs because hemoglobin, the actual blood molecule that
transports oxygen, is chemically unable to bind oxygen
molecules. The most common form of hypemic hypoxia is
CO poisoning. This is explained in greater detail later in this
chapter. Hypemic hypoxia can also be caused by the loss
of blood due to blood donation. Blood volume can require
several weeks to return to normal following a donation.
Although the effects of the blood loss are slight at ground
level, there are risks when flying during this time.
Stagnant Hypoxia
Stagnant means “not flowing,” and stagnant hypoxia or
ischemia results when the oxygen-rich blood in the lungs
is not moving, for one reason or another, to the tissues that

Figure 17-1. Time of useful consciousness.
Altitude
Time of useful consciousness
45,000 feet MSL
40,000 feet MSL
35,000 feet MSL
30,000 feet MSL
28,000 feet MSL
25,000 feet MSL
22,000 feet MSL
20,000 feet MSL
9 to 15 seconds
15 to 20 seconds
30 to 60 seconds
1 to 2 minutes
2½ to 3 minutes
3 to 5 minutes
5 to 10 minutes
30 minutes or more
need it. An arm or leg “going to sleep” because the blood
flow has accidentally been shut off is one form of stagnant
hypoxia. This kind of hypoxia can also result from shock,
the heart failing to pump blood effectively, or a constricted
artery. During flight, stagnant hypoxia can occur with
excessive acceleration of gravity (Gs). Cold temperatures
can also reduce circulation and decrease the blood supplied
to extremities.
Histotoxic Hypoxia
The inability of the cells to effectively use oxygen is defined
as histotoxic hypoxia. “Histo” refers to tissues or cells, and
“toxic” means poisonous. In this case, enough oxygen is being
transported to the cells that need it, but they are unable to make
use of it. This impairment of cellular respiration can be caused
by alcohol and other drugs, such as narcotics and poisons.
Research has shown that drinking one ounce of alcohol can
equate to an additional 2,000 feet of physiological altitude.
Symptoms of Hypoxia
High-altitude flying can place a pilot in danger of becoming
hypoxic. Oxygen starvation causes the brain and other vital
organs to become impaired. The first symptoms of hypoxia
can include euphoria and a carefree feeling. With increased
oxygen starvation, the extremities become less responsive and
flying becomes less coordinated. The symptoms of hypoxia
vary with the individual, but common symptoms include:
Cyanosis (blue fingernails and lips)
Headache
Decreased response to stimuli and increased reaction
time
Impaired judgment
Euphoria
Visual impairment
Drowsiness
Lightheaded or dizzy sensation
Tingling in fingers and toes
Numbness
As hypoxia worsens, the field of vision begins to narrow and
instrument interpretation can become difficult. Even with all
these symptoms, the effects of hypoxia can cause a pilot to
have a false sense of security and be deceived into believing
everything is normal.
Treatment of Hypoxia
Treatment for hypoxia includes flying at lower altitudes and/
or using supplemental oxygen. All pilots are susceptible
to the effects of oxygen starvation, regardless of physical
endurance or acclimatization. When flying at high altitudes,
it is paramount that oxygen be used to avoid the effects of
hypoxia. The term “time of useful consciousness” describes
the maximum time the pilot has to make rational, life-saving
decisions and carry them out at a given altitude without
supplemental oxygen. As altitude increases above 10,000
feet, the symptoms of hypoxia increase in severity, and the
time of useful consciousness rapidly decreases. [Figure 17-1]
Since symptoms of hypoxia can be different for each
individual, the ability to recognize hypoxia can be greatly
improved by experiencing and witnessing the effects of it
during an altitude chamber “flight.” The Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) provides this opportunity through
aviation physiology training, which is conducted at the FAA
CAMI in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, and at many military
facilities across the United States. For information about the
FAA’s one-day physiological training course with altitude
chamber and vertigo demonstrations, visit the FAA website
at www.faa.gov.
Hyperventilation
Hyperventilation is the excessive rate and depth of respiration
leading to abnormal loss of carbon dioxide from the blood.
This condition occurs more often among pilots than is
generally recognized. It seldom incapacitates completely, but
it causes disturbing symptoms that can alarm the uninformed
pilot. In such cases, increased breathing rate and anxiety
further aggravate the problem. Hyperventilation can lead to
unconsciousness due to the respiratory system’s overriding
mechanism to regain control of breathing.
Pilots encountering an unexpected stressful situation may
subconsciously increase their breathing rate. If flying at
higher altitudes, either with or without oxygen, a pilot may
have a tendency to breathe more rapidly than normal, which
often leads to hyperventilation.
Since many of the symptoms of hyperventilation are similar
to those of hypoxia, it is important to correctly diagnose and
treat the proper condition. If using supplemental oxygen,
check the equipment and flow rate to ensure the symptoms are

Figure 17-2. The Eustachian tube allows air pressure to equalize
in the middle ear.
Opening to throat
Middle ear
Outer ear
Auditory canal
Eustachian tube
Eardrum
not hypoxia related. Common symptoms of hyperventilation
include:
Visual impairment
Unconsciousness
Lightheaded or dizzy sensation
Tingling sensations
Hot and cold sensations
Muscle spasms
The treatment for hyperventilation involves restoring
the proper carbon dioxide level in the body. Breathing
normally is both the best prevention and the best cure
for hyperventilation. In addition to slowing the breathing
rate, breathing into a paper bag or talking aloud helps to
overcome hyperventilation. Recovery is usually rapid once
the breathing rate is returned to normal.
Middle Ear and Sinus Problems
During climbs and descents, the free gas formerly present in
various body cavities expands due to a difference between
the pressure of the air outside the body and that of the air
inside the body. If the escape of the expanded gas is impeded,
pressure builds up within the cavity and pain is experienced.
Trapped gas expansion accounts for ear pain and sinus pain,
as well as a temporary reduction in the ability to hear.
The middle ear is a small cavity located in the bone of the
skull. It is closed off from the external ear canal by the
eardrum. Normally, pressure differences between the middle
ear and the outside world are equalized by a tube leading
from inside each ear to the back of the throat on each side
called the Eustachian tube. These tubes are usually closed but
open during chewing, yawning, or swallowing to equalize
pressure. Even a slight difference between external pressure
and middle ear pressure can cause discomfort. [Figure 17-2]
During a climb, middle ear air pressure may exceed the
pressure of the air in the external ear canal causing the
eardrum to bulge outward. Pilots become aware of this
pressure change when they experience alternate sensations
of “fullness” and “clearing.” During descent, the reverse
happens. While the pressure of the air in the external ear
canal increases, the middle ear cavity, which equalized with
the lower pressure at altitude, is at lower pressure than the
external ear canal. This results in the higher outside pressure
causing the eardrum to bulge inward.
This condition can be more difficult to relieve due to the
fact that the partial vacuum tends to constrict the walls of
the Eustachian tube. To remedy this often painful condition,
which also causes a temporary reduction in hearing
sensitivity, pinch the nostrils shut, close the mouth and lips,
and blow slowly and gently into the mouth and nose.
This procedure forces air through the Eustachian tube into the
middle ear. It may not be possible to equalize the pressure in
the ears if a pilot has a cold, an ear infection, or sore throat.
A flight in this condition can be extremely painful, as well as
damaging to the eardrums. If experiencing minor congestion,
nose drops or nasal sprays may reduce the risk of a painful
ear blockage. Before using any medication, check with an
AME to ensure that it will not affect the ability to fly.
In a similar way, air pressure in the sinuses equalizes with
the pressure in the flight deck through small openings
that connect the sinuses to the nasal passages. An upper
respiratory infection, such as a cold or sinusitis, or a nasal
allergic condition can produce enough congestion around an
opening to slow equalization. As the difference in pressure
between the sinuses and the flight deck increases, congestion
may plug the opening. This “sinus block” occurs most
frequently during descent. Slow descent rates can reduce the
associated pain. A sinus block can occur in the frontal sinuses,
located above each eyebrow, or in the maxillary sinuses,
located in each upper cheek. It usually produces excruciating
pain over the sinus area. A maxillary sinus block can also
make the upper teeth ache. Bloody mucus may discharge
from the nasal passages.
Sinus block can be avoided by not flying with an upper
respiratory infection or nasal allergic condition. Adequate
protection is usually not provided by decongestant sprays
or drops to reduce congestion around the sinus openings.
Oral decongestants have side effects that can impair pilot
performance. If a sinus block does not clear shortly after
landing, a physician should be consulted.

Figure 17-3. The semicircular canals lie in three planes and sense motions of roll, pitch, and yaw.
YAW
ROLL
YAW
PITCH
PITCH
ROLL
The semicircular tubes are arranged
at approximately, right angles to each
other in the roll, pitch, and yaw axes.
Vestibular nerve
Endolymph fluid
Ampulla of semicircular canal
Hair cells
Cupola
Semicircular canals
Otolith organ
Spatial Disorientation and Illusions
Spatial disorientation specifically refers to the lack of
orientation with regard to the position, attitude, or movement
of the airplane in space. The body uses three integrated
systems that work together to ascertain orientation and
movement in space.
Vestibular system—organs found in the inner ear that
sense position by the way we are balanced
Somatosensory system—nerves in the skin, muscles,
and joints that, along with hearing, sense position
based on gravity, feeling, and sound
Visual system—eyes, which sense position based on
what is seen
All this information comes together in the brain and, most
of the time, the three streams of information agree, giving
a clear idea of where and how the body is moving. Flying
can sometimes cause these systems to supply conflicting
information to the brain, which can lead to disorientation.
During flight in visual meteorological conditions (VMC),
the eyes are the major orientation source and usually prevail
over false sensations from other sensory systems. When
these visual cues are removed, as they are in instrument
meteorological conditions (IMC), false sensations can cause
a pilot to quickly become disoriented.
The vestibular system in the inner ear allows the pilot to
sense movement and determine orientation in the surrounding
environment. In both the left and right inner ear, three
semicircular canals are positioned at approximate right angles
to each other. [Figure 17-3] Each canal is filled with fluid
and has a section full of fine hairs. Acceleration of the inner
ear in any direction causes the tiny hairs to deflect, which
in turn stimulates nerve impulses, sending messages to the
brain. The vestibular nerve transmits the impulses from
the utricle, saccule, and semicircular canals to the brain to
interpret motion.
The somatosensory system sends signals from the skin, joints,
and muscles to the brain that are interpreted in relation to the
Earth’s gravitational pull. These signals determine posture.
Inputs from each movement update the body’s position to the
brain on a constant basis. “Seat of the pants” flying is largely
dependent upon these signals. Used in conjunction with visual
and vestibular clues, these sensations can be fairly reliable.
However, the body cannot distinguish between acceleration
forces due to gravity and those resulting from maneuvering
the aircraft, which can lead to sensory illusions and false
impressions of an aircraft’s orientation and movement.
Under normal flight conditions, when there is a visual
reference to the horizon and ground, the sensory system in the
inner ear helps to identify the pitch, roll, and yaw movements
of the aircraft. When visual contact with the horizon is lost,
the vestibular system becomes unreliable. Without visual
references outside the aircraft, there are many situations in
which combinations of normal motions and forces create
convincing illusions that are difficult to overcome.

Prevention is usually the best remedy for spatial disorientation.
Unless a pilot has many hours of training in instrument flight,
flight should be avoided in reduced visibility or at night when
the horizon is not visible. A pilot can reduce susceptibility
to disorienting illusions through training and awareness and
learning to rely totally on flight instruments.

Figure 17-4. Human sensation of angular acceleration.
No turning
No sensation.
Start of turn
Sensation of turning
as moving fluid deflects
hairs.
Constant rate turn
No sensation after fluid
accelerates to same
speed as tube wall.
Turn stopped
Sensation of turning in
opposite direction as moving
fluid deflects hairs in opposite
direction.
Endolymph
Cupola
Tube
Figure 17-5. Graveyard spiral.
Graveyard spin
Graveyard spiral
Vestibular Illusions
The Leans
A condition called the leans, is the most common illusion
during flight and is caused by a sudden return to level flight
following a gradual and prolonged turn that went unnoticed by
the pilot. The reason a pilot can be unaware of such a gradual
turn is that human exposure to a rotational acceleration of 2
degrees per second or lower is below the detection threshold
of the semicircular canals. [Figure 17-4] Leveling the wings
after such a turn may cause an illusion that the aircraft is
banking in the opposite direction. In response to such an
illusion, a pilot may lean in the direction of the original turn
in a corrective attempt to regain the perception of a correct
vertical posture.
Coriolis Illusion
The “coriolis illusion” occurs when a pilot has been in a turn
long enough for the fluid in the ear canal to move at the same
speed as the canal. A movement of the head in a different
plane, such as looking at something in a different part of the
flight deck, may set the fluid moving, creating the illusion
of turning or accelerating on an entirely different axis. This
action causes the pilot to think the aircraft is performing a
maneuver it is not. The disoriented pilot may maneuver the
aircraft into a dangerous attitude in an attempt to correct the
aircraft’s perceived attitude.
For this reason, it is important that pilots develop an
instrument cross-check or scan that involves minimal head
movement. Take care when retrieving charts and other objects
in the flight deck—if something is dropped, retrieve it with
minimal head movement and be alert for the coriolis illusion.
Graveyard Spiral
As in other illusions, a pilot in a prolonged coordinated,
constant-rate turn may experience the illusion of not
turning. During the recovery to level flight, the pilot will
then experience the sensation of turning in the opposite
direction causing the disoriented pilot to return the aircraft
to its original turn. Because an aircraft tends to lose altitude
in turns unless the pilot compensates for the loss in lift,
the pilot may notice a loss of altitude. The absence of any
sensation of turning creates the illusion of being in a level
descent. The pilot may pull back on the controls in an attempt
to climb or stop the descent. This action tightens the spiral
and increases the loss of altitude; this illusion is referred to
as a “graveyard spiral.” [Figure 17-5] This may lead to a
loss of aircraft control.
Somatogravic Illusion
A rapid acceleration, such as experienced during takeoff,
stimulates the otolith organs in the same way as tilting the
head backwards. This action may create what is known as
the “somatogravic illusion” of being in a nose-up attitude,
especially in conditions with poor visual references. The
disoriented pilot may push the aircraft into a nose-low or
dive attitude. A rapid deceleration by quick reduction of the
throttle(s) can have the opposite effect, with the disoriented
pilot pulling the aircraft into a nose-up or stall attitude.

Figure 17-6. Sensations from centrifugal force.
Skid, slip, and uncoordinated turns feel similar.
Pilots feel they are being forced sideways in their seat.
Level
Coordinated turn
Pull out
Level skid
Forward slip
Uncoordinated turn
Inversion Illusion
An abrupt change from climb to straight-and-level flight can
stimulate the otolith organs enough to create the illusion of
tumbling backwards, known as “inversion illusion.” The
disoriented pilot may push the aircraft abruptly into a noselow attitude, which may intensify this illusion.
Elevator Illusion
An abrupt upward vertical acceleration, as can occur in an
updraft, can stimulate the otolith organs to create the illusion
of being in a climb. This is known as “elevator illusion.”
The disoriented pilot may push the aircraft into a nose-low
attitude. An abrupt downward vertical acceleration, usually
in a downdraft, has the opposite effect with the disoriented
pilot pulling the aircraft into a nose-up attitude.
Visual Illusions
Visual illusions are especially hazardous because pilots rely
on their eyes for correct information. Two illusions that lead
to spatial disorientation, false horizon and autokinesis, affect
the visual system only.
False Horizon
A sloping cloud formation, an obscured horizon, an aurora
borealis, a dark scene spread with ground lights and stars,
and certain geometric patterns of ground lights can provide
inaccurate visual information, or “false horizon,” when
attempting to align the aircraft with the actual horizon.
The disoriented pilots as a result may place the aircraft in a
dangerous attitude.
Autokinesis
When flying in the dark, a stationary light may appear to
move if it is stared at for a prolonged period of time. As
a result, a pilot may attempt to align the aircraft with the
perceived moving light potentially causing him/her to lose
control of the aircraft. This illusion is known as “autokinesis.”
Postural Considerations
The postural system sends signals from the skin, joints, and
muscles to the brain that are interpreted in relation to the
Earth’s gravitational pull. These signals determine posture.
Inputs from each movement update the body’s position to
the brain on a constant basis. “Seat of the pants” flying is
largely dependent upon these signals. Used in conjunction
with visual and vestibular clues, these sensations can be
fairly reliable. However, because of the forces acting upon
the body in certain flight situations, many false sensations
can occur due to acceleration forces overpowering gravity.
[Figure 17-6] These situations include uncoordinated turns,
climbing turns, and turbulence.
Demonstration of Spatial Disorientation
There are a number of controlled aircraft maneuvers a pilot
can perform to experiment with spatial disorientation. While
each maneuver normally creates a specific illusion, any false
sensation is an effective demonstration of disorientation.
Thus, even if there is no sensation during any of these
maneuvers, the absence of sensation is still an effective
demonstration because it illustrates the inability to detect
bank or roll.

aircraft to approximately 45° bank attitude while maintaining
heading and pitch attitude. This creates the illusion of a strong
sense of rotation in the opposite direction. After this illusion
is noted, the pilot should open his or her eyes and observe
that the aircraft is in a banked attitude.
Diving or Rolling Beyond the Vertical Plane
This maneuver may produce extreme disorientation. While
in straight-and-level flight, the pilot should sit normally,
either with eyes closed or gaze lowered to the floor. The
instructor pilot starts a positive, coordinated roll toward a
30° or 40° angle of bank. As this is in progress, the pilot
tilts his or her head forward, looks to the right or left, then
immediately returns his or her head to an upright position.
The instructor pilot should time the maneuver so the roll is
stopped as the pilot returns his or her head upright. An intense
disorientation is usually produced by this maneuver, and the
pilot experiences the sensation of falling downward into the
direction of the roll.
In the descriptions of these maneuvers, the instructor pilot is
doing the flying, but having the pilot do the flying can also
be a very effective demonstration. The pilot should close his
or her eyes and tilt the head to one side. The instructor pilot
tells the pilot what control inputs to perform. The pilot then
attempts to establish the correct attitude or control input with
eyes closed and head tilted. While it is clear the pilot has no
idea of the actual attitude, he or she will react to what the
senses are saying. After a short time, the pilot will become
disoriented and the instructor pilot will tell the pilot to look
up and recover. This exercise allows the pilot to experience
the disorientation while flying the aircraft.
Coping with Spatial Disorientation
To prevent illusions and their potentially disastrous
consequences, pilots can:
Understand the causes of these illusions and remain
constantly alert for them. Take the opportunity to
experience spatial disorientation illusions in a device,
such as a Barany chair, a Vertigon, or a Virtual Reality
Spatial Disorientation Demonstrator.
Always obtain and understand preflight weather
briefings.
Before flying in marginal visibility (less than 3 miles)
or where a visible horizon is not evident, such as flight
over open water during the night, obtain training and
maintain proficiency in aircraft control by reference
to instruments.
Do not fly into adverse weather conditions or into
dusk or darkness unless proficient in the use of flight
instruments. If intending to fly at night, maintain
There are several objectives in demonstrating these various
maneuvers.
They teach pilots to understand the susceptibility of
the human system to spatial disorientation.
They demonstrate that judgments of aircraft attitude
based on bodily sensations are frequently false.
They help decrease the occurrence and degree
of disorientation through a better understanding
of the relationship between aircraft motion, head
movements, and resulting disorientation.
They help instill a greater confidence in relying on
flight instruments for assessing true aircraft attitude.
A pilot should not attempt any of these maneuvers at
low altitudes or in the absence of an instructor pilot or an
appropriate safety pilot.
Climbing While Accelerating
With the pilot’s eyes closed, the instructor pilot maintains
approach airspeed in a straight-and-level attitude for several
seconds, then accelerates while maintaining straight-andlevel attitude. The usual illusion during this maneuver,
without visual references, is that the aircraft is climbing.
Climbing While Turning
With the pilot’s eyes still closed and the aircraft in a straightand-level attitude, the instructor pilot now executes, with a
relatively slow entry, a well coordinated turn of about 1.5
positive G (approximately 50° bank) for 90°. While in the
turn, without outside visual references and under the effect of
the slight positive G, the usual illusion produced is that of a
climb. Upon sensing the climb, the pilot should immediately
open the eyes to see that a slowly established, coordinated
turn produces the same sensation as a climb.
Diving While Turning
Repeating the previous procedure, but with the pilot’s
eyes should be kept closed until recovery from the turn is
approximately one-half completed, can create the illusion of
diving while turning.
Tilting to Right or Left
While in a straight-and-level attitude, with the pilot’s eyes
closed, the instructor pilot executes a moderate or slight skid
to the left with wings level. This creates the illusion of the
body being tilted to the right.
Reversal of Motion
This illusion can be demonstrated in any of the three planes
of motion. While straight and level, with the pilot’s eyes
closed, the instructor pilot smoothly and positively rolls the

night-flight currency and proficiency. Include crosscountry and local operations at various airfields.
Ensure that when outside visual references are used,
they are reliable, fixed points on the Earth’s surface.
Avoid sudden head movement, particularly during
takeoffs, turns, and approaches to landing.
7.
Be physically tuned for flight into reduced visibility.
Ensure proper rest, adequate diet, and, if flying at
night, allow for night adaptation. Remember that
illness, medication, alcohol, fatigue, sleep loss, and
mild hypoxia are likely to increase susceptibility to
spatial disorientation.
8.
Most importantly, become proficient in the use of
flight instruments and rely upon them. Trust the
instruments and disregard your sensory perceptions.
The sensations that lead to illusions during instrument
flight conditions are normal perceptions experienced by
pilots. These undesirable sensations cannot be completely
prevented, but through training and awareness, pilots can
ignore or suppress them by developing absolute reliance
on the flight instruments. As pilots gain proficiency in
instrument flying, they become less susceptible to these
illusions and their effects.
Optical Illusions
Of the senses, vision is the most important for safe flight.
However, various terrain features and atmospheric conditions
can create optical illusions. These illusions are primarily
associated with landing. Since pilots must transition from
reliance on instruments to visual cues outside the flight
deck for landing at the end of an instrument approach, it
is imperative that they be aware of the potential problems
associated with these illusions and take appropriate corrective
action. The major illusions leading to landing errors are
described below.
Runway Width Illusion
A narrower-than-usual runway can create an illusion that the
aircraft is at a higher altitude than it actually is, especially
when runway length-to-width relationships are comparable.
[Figure 17-7] The pilot who does not recognize this illusion
will fly a lower approach, with the risk of striking objects
along the approach path or landing short. A wider-thanusual runway can have the opposite effect with the risk of
the pilot leveling out the aircraft high and landing hard or
overshooting the runway.
Runway and Terrain Slopes Illusion
An upsloping runway, upsloping terrain, or both can create an
illusion that the aircraft is at a higher altitude than it actually
is. [Figure 17-7] The pilot who does not recognize this
illusion will fly a lower approach. Downsloping runways and
downsloping approach terrain can have the opposite effect.
Featureless Terrain Illusion
An absence of surrounding ground features, as in an
overwater approach over darkened areas or terrain made
featureless by snow, can create an illusion that the aircraft is
at a higher altitude than it actually is. This illusion, sometimes
referred to as the “black hole approach,” causes pilots to fly
a lower approach than is desired.
Water Refraction
Rain on the windscreen can create an illusion of being at a
higher altitude due to the horizon appearing lower than it is.
This can result in the pilot flying a lower approach.
Haze
Atmospheric haze can create an illusion of being at a greater
distance and height from the runway. As a result, the pilot
has a tendency to be low on the approach. Conversely,
extremely clear air (clear bright conditions of a high attitude
airport) can give the pilot the illusion of being closer than
he or she actually is, resulting in a high approach that may
result in an overshoot or go around. The diffusion of light
due to water particles on the windshield can adversely affect
depth perception. The lights and terrain features normally
used to gauge height during landing become less effective
for the pilot.
Fog
Flying into fog can create an illusion of pitching up. Pilots
who do not recognize this illusion often steepen the approach
abruptly.
Ground Lighting Illusions
Lights along a straight path, such as a road or lights on moving
trains, can be mistaken for runway and approach lights. Bright
runway and approach lighting systems, especially where
few lights illuminate the surrounding terrain, may create the
illusion of less distance to the runway. The pilot who does
not recognize this illusion will often fly a higher approach.
How To Prevent Landing Errors Due to Optical
Illusions
To prevent these illusions and their potentially hazardous
consequences, pilots can:
Anticipate the possibility of visual illusions during
approaches to unfamiliar airports, particularly at night
or in adverse weather conditions. Consult airport

Figure 17-7. Runway illusions.
Normal Approach
Normal Approach
Normal Approach
Normal Approach
Downsloping runway
Upsloping runway
Upsloping runway
Downsloping runway
Wider runway
Narrower runway
Wider runway
Narrower runway
Normal approach
 Approach due to illusion
Runway width illusion

• A narrower-than-usual runway can

create an illusion that the aircraft

is higher than it actually is, leading

to a lower approach.

•  A wider-than-usual runway can

create an illusion that the aircraft is

lower than it actually is, leading to

a higher approach.

Runway slope illusion

•  A downsloping runway can create

the illusion that the aircraft is lower

than it actually is, leading to a

higher approach.

• An upsloping runway can create

the illusion that the aircraft is higher

than it actually is, leading to a lower

approach.

diagrams and the Chart Supplement U.S. (formerly
Airport/Facility Directory) for information on runway
slope, terrain, and lighting.
Make frequent reference to the altimeter, especially
during all approaches, day and night.
If possible, conduct an aerial visual inspection of
unfamiliar airports before landing.
Use Visual Approach Slope Indicator (VASI) or
Precision Approach Path Indicator (PAPI) systems
for a visual reference, or an electronic glideslope,
whenever they are available.
Utilize the visual descent point (VDP) found on many
nonprecision instrument approach procedure charts.

Recognize that the chances of being involved in an
approach accident increase when an emergency or
other activity distracts from usual procedures.
7.
Maintain optimum proficiency in landing procedures.
In addition to the sensory illusions due to misleading inputs to
the vestibular system, a pilot may also encounter various visual
illusions during flight. Illusions rank among the most common
factors cited as contributing to fatal aviation accidents.
Sloping cloud formations, an obscured horizon, a dark scene
spread with ground lights and stars, and certain geometric
patterns of ground light can create illusions of not being
aligned correctly with the actual horizon. Various surface
features and atmospheric conditions encountered in landing
can create illusions of being on the wrong approach path.
Landing errors due to these illusions can be prevented by
anticipating them during approaches, inspecting unfamiliar
airports before landing, using electronic glideslope or VASI
systems when available, and maintaining proficiency in
landing procedures.
Motion Sickness
Motion sickness, or airsickness, is caused by the brain
receiving conflicting messages about the state of the body. A
pilot may experience motion sickness during initial flights, but
it generally goes away within the first few lessons. Anxiety
and stress, which may be experienced at the beginning of
flight training, can contribute to motion sickness. Symptoms
of motion sickness include general discomfort, nausea,
dizziness, paleness, sweating, and vomiting.
It is important to remember that experiencing airsickness is
no reflection on one’s ability as a pilot. If prone to motion
sickness, let the flight instructor know, there are techniques
that can be used to overcome this problem. For example,
avoid lessons in turbulent conditions until becoming more
comfortable in the aircraft or start with shorter flights and
graduate to longer instruction periods. If symptoms of motion
sickness are experienced during a lesson, opening fresh air
vents, focusing on objects outside the airplane, and avoiding
unnecessary head movements may help alleviate some of the
discomfort. Although medications like Dramamine can prevent
airsickness in passengers, they are not recommended while
flying since they can cause drowsiness and other problems.
Carbon Monoxide (CO) Poisoning
CO is a colorless and odorless gas produced by all internal
combustion engines. Attaching itself to the hemoglobin in
the blood about 200 times more easily than oxygen, CO
prevents the hemoglobin from carrying oxygen to the cells,
resulting in hypemic hypoxia. The body requires up to 48
hours to dispose of CO. If severe enough, the CO poisoning
can result in death. Aircraft heater vents and defrost vents
may provide CO a passageway into the cabin, particularly if
the engine exhaust system has a leak or is damaged. If a strong
odor of exhaust gases is detected, assume that CO is present.
However, CO may be present in dangerous amounts even
if no exhaust odor is detected. Disposable, inexpensive CO
detectors are widely available. In the presence of CO, these
detectors change color to alert the pilot of the presence of CO.
Some effects of CO poisoning are headache, blurred vision,
dizziness, drowsiness, and/or loss of muscle power. Any time
a pilot smells exhaust odor, or any time these symptoms are
experienced, immediate corrective action should be taken
including turning off the heater, opening fresh air vents and
windows, and using supplemental oxygen, if available.
Tobacco smoke also causes CO poisoning. Smoking at
sea level can raise the CO concentration in the blood and
result in physiological effects similar to flying at 8,000 feet.
Besides hypoxia, tobacco causes diseases and physiological
debilitation that can be medically disqualifying for pilots.
Stress
Stress is the body’s response to physical and psychological
demands placed upon it. The body’s reaction to stress includes
releasing chemical hormones (such as adrenaline) into the
blood and increasing metabolism to provide more energy
to the muscles. Blood sugar, heart rate, respiration, blood
pressure, and perspiration all increase. The term “stressor”
is used to describe an element that causes an individual to
experience stress. Examples of stressors include physical
stress (noise or vibration), physiological stress (fatigue), and
psychological stress (difficult work or personal situations).
Stress falls into two broad categories: acute (short term) and
chronic (long term). Acute stress involves an immediate
threat that is perceived as danger. This is the type of stress that
triggers a “fight or flight” response in an individual, whether
the threat is real or imagined. Normally, a healthy person can
cope with acute stress and prevent stress overload. However,
ongoing acute stress can develop into chronic stress.
Chronic stress can be defined as a level of stress that presents
an intolerable burden, exceeds the ability of an individual
to cope, and causes individual performance to fall sharply.
Unrelenting psychological pressures, such as loneliness,
financial worries, and relationship or work problems can
produce a cumulative level of stress that exceeds a person’s
ability to cope with the situation. When stress reaches these
levels, performance falls off rapidly. Pilots experiencing
this level of stress are not safe and should not exercise their
airman privileges. Pilots who suspect they are suffering from
chronic stress should consult a physician.

Fatigue
Fatigue is frequently associated with pilot error. Some of
the effects of fatigue include degradation of attention and
concentration, impaired coordination, and decreased ability
to communicate. These factors seriously influence the
ability to make effective decisions. Physical fatigue results
from sleep loss, exercise, or physical work. Factors such as
stress and prolonged performance of cognitive work result
in mental fatigue.
Like stress, fatigue falls into two broad categories: acute
and chronic. Acute fatigue is short term and is a normal
occurrence in everyday living. It is the kind of tiredness
people feel after a period of strenuous effort, excitement, or
lack of sleep. Rest after exertion and 8 hours of sound sleep
ordinarily cures this condition.
A special type of acute fatigue is skill fatigue. This type of
fatigue has two main effects on performance:
Timing disruption—appearing to perform a task as
usual, but the timing of each component is slightly off.
This makes the pattern of the operation less smooth
because the pilot performs each component as though it
were separate, instead of part of an integrated activity.
Disruption of the perceptual field—concentrating
attention upon movements or objects in the center of
vision and neglecting those in the periphery. This is
accompanied by loss of accuracy and smoothness in
control movements.
Acute fatigue has many causes, but the following are among
the most important for the pilot:
Mild hypoxia (oxygen deficiency)
Physical stress
Psychological stress
Depletion of physical energy resulting from
psychological stress
Sustained psychological stress
Sustained psychological stress accelerates the glandular
secretions that prepare the body for quick reactions during
an emergency. These secretions make the circulatory and
respiratory systems work harder, and the liver releases energy
to provide the extra fuel needed for brain and muscle work.
When this reserve energy supply is depleted, the body lapses
into generalized and severe fatigue.
Acute fatigue can be prevented by proper diet and adequate
rest and sleep. A well-balanced diet prevents the body from
needing to consume its own tissues as an energy source.
Adequate rest maintains the body’s store of vital energy.
Chronic fatigue, extending over a long period of time, usually
has psychological roots, although an underlying disease is
sometimes responsible. Continuous high-stress levels produce
chronic fatigue. Chronic fatigue is not relieved by proper diet
and adequate rest and sleep and usually requires treatment
by a physician. An individual may experience this condition
in the form of weakness, tiredness, palpitations of the heart,
breathlessness, headaches, or irritability. Sometimes chronic
fatigue even creates stomach or intestinal problems and
generalized aches and pains throughout the body. When the
condition becomes serious enough, it leads to emotional illness.
If suffering from acute fatigue, stay on the ground. If fatigue
occurs in the flight deck, no amount of training or experience
can overcome the detrimental effects. Getting adequate rest
is the only way to prevent fatigue from occurring. Avoid
flying without a full night’s rest, after working excessive
hours, or after an especially exhausting or stressful day. Pilots
who suspect they are suffering from chronic fatigue should
consult a physician.
Exposure to Chemicals
When conducting preflight and post-flight inspections, pilots
must verify that the fluid levels in their aircraft meet the
levels specified for safe operations as stated in the Pilot's
Operating Handbook. These fluids include, but are not limited
to hydraulic fluid, engine oil, and fuel.
It is important that every pilot recognize the potential hazards
of working with these fluids as well as the recommended first
aid measures to follow should any of these fluids come in
contact with their eyes, skin, and/or respiratory system. As
the specific first aid measures for dealing with exposure to
these chemicals can vary by chemical type, it is important that
every pilot be familiar with the location and use of the Material
Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) for each chemical they encounter.
The procedures described in the following sections are
minimum guideline for first aid for each of the indicated
scenarios. Ultimately, the pilot should consult the MSDS
for first aid procedures specific to the type of chemical and
exposure scenario.
Hydraulic Fluid
Eye Contact—immediately flush the eyes with clean
water and seek medical attention if irritation occurs.
Skin Contact—remove all contaminated clothing and
thoroughly cleanse the affected areas with mild soap
and water or a waterless hand cleaner. If irritation or
redness develops and persists, seek medical attention.
Should the hydraulic fluid get into or under the skin,
or into any other part of the body, regardless of the

appearance of the wound or its size, seek medical
attention immediately.
Inhalation—if respiratory symptoms develop, move
away from the source of exposure and into fresh air
in a position comfortable for breathing. If symptoms
persist, seek medical attention.
Ingestion—first aid is not normally required; however,
if swallowed and symptoms develop, seek medical
attention.
Engine Oil
Eye Contact—immediately flush the eyes with clean
water and seek medical attention if irritation occurs.
Skin Contact—remove all contaminated clothing and
thoroughly cleanse the affected areas with soap and
water. Launder contaminated clothing before reuse.
Inhalation—move away from the source of exposure
and into fresh air. If respiratory irritation, dizziness,
nausea, or unconsciousness occurs, seek immediate
medical attention. If breathing stops, assisted
ventilation is required via a bag-valve-mask or
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR).
Ingestion—seek immediate medical attention. If
immediate medical attention is not available, contact
a regional poison control center or emergency medical
professional regarding the induction of vomiting or
use of activated charcoal. Vomiting should never be
induced to a person who is groggy or unconscious.
Fuel
Eye Contact—immediately flush the eyes with
clean water for at least 15 minutes and seek medical
attention immediately.
Skin Contact—remove all contaminated clothing
and thoroughly cleanse the affected areas with mild
soap and water or a waterless hand cleaner. If skin
surface is damaged, apply a clean dressing and seek
medical attention. If irritation or redness develops,
seek medical attention. Launder contaminated clothing
before reuse.
Inhalation—move away from the source of exposure
and into fresh air. If breathing stops, assisted
ventilation is required via a bag-valve-mask or
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). Once breathing
is restored, the use of additional oxygen may be
necessary. Seek medical attention immediately.
Ingestion—seek immediate medical attention. Do not
induce vomiting or take anything by mouth as this may
cause the material to enter the lungs and cause severe
lung damage. Should vomiting occur, keep head below
the hips to reduce the risks of aspiration. Monitor for
breathing difficulties. Rinse out any material which
enters the mouth until the taste is dissipated.
Dehydration and Heatstroke
Dehydration is the term given to a critical loss of water from
the body. Causes of dehydration are hot flight decks and
flight lines, wind, humidity, and diuretic drinks—coffee, tea,
alcohol, and caffeinated soft drinks. Some common signs of
dehydration are headache, fatigue, cramps, sleepiness, and
dizziness.
The first noticeable effect of dehydration is fatigue, which
in turn makes top physical and mental performance difficult,
if not impossible. Flying for long periods in hot summer
temperatures or at high altitudes increases the susceptibility
to dehydration because these conditions tend to increase the
rate of water loss from the body.
To help prevent dehydration, drink two to four quarts of
water every 24 hours. Since each person is physiologically
different, this is only a guide. Most people are aware of the
eight-glasses-a-day guide: If each glass of water is eight
ounces, this equates to 64 ounces, which is two quarts. If
this fluid is not replaced, fatigue progresses to dizziness,
weakness, nausea, tingling of hands and feet, abdominal
cramps, and extreme thirst.
The key for pilots is to be continually aware of their condition.
Most people become thirsty with a 1.5 quart deficit or a loss
of 2 percent of total body weight. This level of dehydration
triggers the “thirst mechanism.” The problem is that the thirst
mechanism arrives too late and is turned off too easily. A
small amount of fluid in the mouth turns this mechanism off
and the replacement of needed body fluid is delayed.
Other steps to prevent dehydration include:
Carrying a container in order to measure daily water
intake.
Staying ahead—not relying on the thirst sensation as
an alarm. If plain water is not preferred, add some
sport drink flavoring to make it more acceptable.
Limiting daily intake of caffeine and alcohol (both are
diuretics and stimulate increased production of urine).
Heatstroke is a condition caused by any inability of the body
to control its temperature. Onset of this condition may be
recognized by the symptoms of dehydration, but also has
been known to be recognized only upon complete collapse.

Type Beverage
Typical Serving
Pure Alcohol
(oz)
Content (oz)
Table wine
Light beer
Aperitif liquor
Champagne
Vodka
Whiskey

4.0
 12.0

1.5

4.0

1.0

1.25
.48
.48
.38
.48
.50
.50
 0.01–0.05%
average individual appears normal
(10–50 mg)
 0.03–0.12%*
mild euphoria, talkativeness, decreased
 (30–120 mg)
inhibitions, decreased attention, impaired
judgment, increased reaction time
 0.09–0.25%
emotional instability, loss of critical
 (90–250 mg)
judgment, impairment of memory and
comprehension, decreased sensory
response, mild muscular incoordination
 0.18–0.30%
confusion, dizziness, exaggerated
 (180–300 mg)
emotions (anger, fear, grief), impaired
visual perception, decreased pain
sensation, impaired balance, staggering
gait, slurred speech, moderate muscular
incoordination
0.27–0.40%
apathy, impaired consciousness, stupor,
(270–400 mg)
signiﬁcantly decreased response to
stimulation, severe muscular
incoordination, inability to stand or walk,
vomiting, incontinence of urine and feces
0.35–0.50%
unconsciousness, depressed or
(350–500 mg)
abolished reﬂexes, abnormal body
temperature, coma, possible death from
respiratory paralysis (450 mg or above)
* Legal limit for motor vehicle operation in most states is 0.08
or 0.10% (80–100 mg of alcohol per dL of blood).
Figure 17-8. Impairment scale with alcohol use.
To prevent these symptoms, it is recommended that an
ample supply of water be carried and used at frequent
intervals on any long flight, whether thirsty or not. The body
normally absorbs water at a rate of 1.2 to 1.5 quarts per hour.
Individuals should drink one quart per hour for severe heat
stress conditions or one pint per hour for moderate stress
conditions. If the aircraft has a canopy or roof window,
wearing light-colored, porous clothing and a hat will help
provide protection from the sun. Keeping the flight deck well
ventilated aids in dissipating excess heat.
Alcohol
Alcohol impairs the efficiency of the human body.
[Figure 17-8] Studies have shown that consuming alcohol
is closely linked to performance deterioration. Pilots must
make hundreds of decisions, some of them time-critical,
during the course of a flight. The safe outcome of any flight
depends on the ability to make the correct decisions and take
the appropriate actions during routine occurrences, as well
as abnormal situations. The influence of alcohol drastically
reduces the chances of completing a flight without incident.
Even in small amounts, alcohol can impair judgment,
decrease sense of responsibility, affect coordination, constrict
visual field, diminish memory, reduce reasoning ability, and
lower attention span. As little as one ounce of alcohol can
decrease the speed and strength of muscular reflexes, lessen
the efficiency of eye movements while reading, and increase
the frequency at which errors are committed. Impairments
in vision and hearing can occur from consuming as little as
one drink.
The alcohol consumed in beer and mixed drinks is ethyl
alcohol, a central nervous system depressant. From a medical
point of view, it acts on the body much like a general
anesthetic. The “dose” is generally much lower and more
slowly consumed in the case of alcohol, but the basic effects
on the human body are similar. Alcohol is easily and quickly
absorbed by the digestive tract. The bloodstream absorbs
about 80 to 90 percent of the alcohol in a drink within 30
minutes when ingested on an empty stomach. The body
requires about 3 hours to rid itself of all the alcohol contained
in one mixed drink or one beer.
While experiencing a hangover, a pilot is still under the
influence of alcohol. Although a pilot may think he or she is
functioning normally, motor and mental response impairment
is still present. Considerable amounts of alcohol can remain
in the body for over 16 hours, so pilots should be cautious
about flying too soon after drinking.
Altitude multiplies the effects of alcohol on the brain. When
combined with altitude, the alcohol from two drinks may have
the same effect as three or four drinks. Alcohol interferes
with the brain’s ability to utilize oxygen, producing a form
of histotoxic hypoxia. The effects are rapid because alcohol
passes quickly into the bloodstream. In addition, the brain
is a highly vascular organ that is immediately sensitive to
changes in the blood’s composition. For a pilot, the lower
oxygen availability at altitude and the lower capability of
the brain to use the oxygen that is available can add up to a
deadly combination.
Intoxication is determined by the amount of alcohol in the
bloodstream. This is usually measured as a percentage by
weight in the blood. 14 CFR part 91 requires that blood
alcohol level be less than .04 percent and that 8 hours pass
between drinking alcohol and piloting an
