Navigation
Chapter 16
This chapter provides an introduction to cross-country
flying under visual flight rules (VFR). It contains practical
information for planning and executing cross-country flights
for the beginning pilot.
Air navigation is the process of piloting an aircraft from
one geographic position to another while monitoring one’s
position as the flight progresses. It introduces the need for
planning, which includes plotting the course on an aeronautical
chart, selecting checkpoints, measuring distances, obtaining
pertinent weather information, and computing flight time,
headings, and fuel requirements. The methods used in this
chapter include pilotage—navigating by reference to visible
landmarks, dead reckoning—computations of direction and
distance from a known position, and radio navigation—by
use of radio aids.

Figure 16-1. Sectional chart and legend.
Aeronautical Charts
An aeronautical chart is the road map for a pilot flying under
VFR. The chart provides information that allows pilots to track
their position and provides available information that enhances
safety. The three aeronautical charts used by VFR pilots are:
Sectional
VFR Terminal Area
World Aeronautical
A free catalog listing aeronautical charts and related
publications including prices and instructions for ordering is
available at the Aeronautical Navigation Products website:
www.aeronav.faa.gov.
Sectional Charts
Sectional charts are the most common charts used by pilots
today. The charts have a scale of 1:500,000 (1 inch = 6.86
nautical miles (NM) or approximately 8 statute miles (SM)),
which allows for more detailed information to be included
on the chart.
The charts provide an abundance of information, including
airport data, navigational aids, airspace, and topography.
Figure 16-1 is an excerpt from the legend of a sectional
chart. By referring to the chart legend, a pilot can interpret
most of the information on the chart. A pilot should also
check the chart for other legend information, which includes
air traffic control (ATC) frequencies and information on
airspace. These charts are revised semiannually except for
some areas outside the conterminous United States where
they are revised annually.
VFR Terminal Area Charts
VFR terminal area charts are helpful when flying in or near
Class B airspace. They have a scale of 1:250,000 (1 inch
= 3.43 NM or approximately 4 SM). These charts provide
a more detailed display of topographical information and
are revised semiannually, except for several Alaskan and
Caribbean charts. [Figure 16-2]
World Aeronautical Charts
World aeronautical charts are designed to provide a standard
series of aeronautical charts, covering land areas of the world,

Figure 16-2. VFR Terminal Area Chart and legend.
at a size and scale convenient for navigation by moderate speed
aircraft. They are produced at a scale of 1:1,000,000 (1 inch =
13.7 NM or approximately 16 SM). These charts are similar to
sectional charts, and the symbols are the same except there is
less detail due to the smaller scale. [Figure 16-3] These charts
are revised annually except several Alaskan charts and the
Mexican/Caribbean charts, which are revised every 2 years.
Latitude and Longitude (Meridians and
Parallels)
The equator is an imaginary circle equidistant from the poles
of the Earth. Circles parallel to the equator (lines running east
and west) are parallels of latitude. They are used to measure
degrees of latitude north (N) or south (S) of the equator. The
angular distance from the equator to the pole is one-fourth
of a circle or 90°. The 48 conterminous states of the United
States are located between 25° and 49° N latitude. The arrows
in Figure 16-4 labeled “Latitude” point to lines of latitude.
Meridians of longitude are drawn from the North Pole to the
South Pole and are at right angles to the Equator. The “Prime
Meridian,” which passes through Greenwich, England, is
used as the zero line from which measurements are made in
degrees east (E) and west (W) to 180°. The 48 conterminous
states of the United States are between 67° and 125° W
longitude. The arrows in Figure 16-4 labeled “Longitude”
point to lines of longitude.
Any specific geographical point can be located by reference
to its longitude and latitude. Washington, D.C., for example,
is approximately 39° N latitude, 77° W longitude. Chicago
is approximately 42° N latitude, 88° W longitude.
Time Zones
The meridians are also useful for designating time zones. A
day is defined as the time required for the Earth to make one
complete rotation of 360°. Since the day is divided into 24
hours, the Earth revolves at the rate of 15° an hour. Noon is
the time when the sun is directly above a meridian; to the
west of that meridian is morning, to the east is afternoon.

Figure 16-4. Meridians and parallels—the basis of measuring time,
distance, and direction.

ng
itu
de
    La
titud

Equ
ator

Equ
ator
°

60°
45°
30°
15°N

15°S

30°S

45°S

60°S

90°N
°

60°
45°
30°
15°N

15°S

30°S

45°S

60°S

90°N
5°
°W
90°W
75°W
60°
45°
°W
°W
Pr
im
er
id
ia
5°
°W
90°W
75°W
60°
45°
°W
°W
Pr
im
er
id
ia
Figure 16-3. World aeronautical chart.
The standard practice is to establish a time zone for each
15° of longitude. This makes a difference of exactly 1 hour
between each zone. In the conterminous United States,
there are four time zones. The time zones are Eastern (75°),
Central (90°), Mountain (105°), and Pacific (120°). The
dividing lines are somewhat irregular because communities
near the boundaries often find it more convenient to use time
designations of neighboring communities or trade centers.
Figure 16-5 shows the time zones in the conterminous United
States. When the sun is directly above the 90th meridian, it
is noon Central Standard Time. At the same time, it is 1 p.m.
Eastern Standard Time, 11 a.m. Mountain Standard Time,
and 10 a.m. Pacific Standard Time. When Daylight Saving
Time is in effect, generally between the second Sunday in
March and the first Sunday in November, the sun is directly
above the 75th meridian at noon, Central Daylight Time.
These time zone differences must be taken into account
during long flights eastward—especially if the flight must
be completed before dark. Remember, an hour is lost when

Figure 16-5. Time zones in the conterminous United States.
105°
120°
90°
75°
Mountain standard time
Central standard time
Eastern standard time
Pacific standard time
flying eastward from one time zone to another, or perhaps
even when flying from the western edge to the eastern edge
of the same time zone. Determine the time of sunset at the
destination by consulting the flight service station (FSS) and
take this into account when planning an eastbound flight.
In most aviation operations, time is expressed in terms of
the 24-hour clock. ATC instructions, weather reports and
broadcasts, and estimated times of arrival are all based on
this system. For example: 9 a.m. is expressed as 0900, 1 p.m.
is 1300, and 10 p.m. is 2200.
Because a pilot may cross several time zones during a flight, a
standard time system has been adopted. It is called Universal
Coordinated Time (UTC) and is often referred to as Zulu
time. UTC is the time at the 0° line of longitude which passes
through Greenwich, England. All of the time zones around
the world are based on this reference. To convert to this time,
a pilot should do the following:

Eastern Standard Time...........Add 5 hours

Central Standard Time...........Add 6 hours

Mountain Standard Time.......Add 7 hours

Pacific Standard Time............Add 8 hours
For Daylight Saving Time, 1 hour should be subtracted from
the calculated times.
Measurement of Direction
By using the meridians, direction from one point to another
can be measured in degrees, in a clockwise direction from
true north. To indicate a course to be followed in flight,
draw a line on the chart from the point of departure to the
destination and measure the angle that this line forms with
a meridian. Direction is expressed in degrees, as shown by
the compass rose in Figure 16-6.
Because meridians converge toward the poles, course
measurement should be taken at a meridian near the midpoint
of the course rather than at the point of departure. The course
measured on the chart is known as the true course (TC). This
is the direction measured by reference to a meridian or true
north (TN). It is the direction of intended flight as measured
in degrees clockwise from TN.
As shown in Figure 16-7, the direction from A to B would be
a TC of 065°, whereas the return trip (called the reciprocal)
would be a TC of 245°.

Figure 16-7. Courses are determined by reference to meridians on
aeronautical charts.
Course A to B 065°
Course B to A 245°
°

°

Figure 16-8. Magnetic meridians are in red while the lines of
longitude and latitude are in blue. From these lines of variation
(magnetic meridians), one can determine the effect of local magnetic
variations on a magnetic compass.
MN
TN
Figure 16-6. Compass rose.

The true heading (TH) is the direction in which the nose of
the aircraft points during a flight when measured in degrees
clockwise from TN. Usually, it is necessary to head the
aircraft in a direction slightly different from the TC to offset
the effect of wind. Consequently, numerical value of the TH
may not correspond with that of the TC. This is discussed
more fully in subsequent sections in this chapter. For the
purpose of this discussion, assume a no-wind condition exists
under which heading and course would coincide. Thus, for
a TC of 065°, the TH would be 065°. To use the compass
accurately, however, corrections must be made for magnetic
variation and compass deviation.
Variation
Variation is the angle between TN and magnetic north (MN).
It is expressed as east variation or west variation depending
upon whether MN is to the east or west of TN.
The north magnetic pole is located close to 71° N latitude, 96°
W longitude and is about 1,300 miles from the geographic
or true north pole, as indicated in Figure 16-8. If the Earth
were uniformly magnetized, the compass needle would point
toward the magnetic pole, in which case the variation between
TN (as shown by the geographical meridians) and MN (as
shown by the magnetic meridians) could be measured at any
intersection of the meridians.
Actually, the Earth is not uniformly magnetized. In the United
States, the needle usually points in the general direction of
the magnetic pole, but it may vary in certain geographical
localities by many degrees. Consequently, the exact amount
of variation at thousands of selected locations in the United
States has been carefully determined. The amount and the
direction of variation, which change slightly from time
to time, are shown on most aeronautical charts as broken
magenta lines called isogonic lines that connect points of
equal magnetic variation. (The line connecting points at
which there is no variation between TN and MN is the agonic
line.) An isogonic chart is shown in Figure 16-9. Minor
bends and turns in the isogonic and agonic lines are caused
by unusual geological conditions affecting magnetic forces
in these areas.
On the west coast of the United States, the compass needle
points to the east of TN; on the east coast, the compass needle
points to the west of TN.

Figure 16-9. Note the agonic line where magnetic variation is zero.
Easterly variation
Westerly variation
Agonic line
Figure 16-10. Effect of variation on the compass.
Zero
variation
ri
ti

ri
ti
NP
MP
SP
SP
NP
MP
NP
MP
SP
Zero degree variation exists on the agonic line where
MN and TN coincide. This line runs roughly west of the
Great Lakes, south through Wisconsin, Illinois, western
Tennessee, and along the border of Mississippi and Alabama.
Compare Figures 16-9 and 16-10.
Because courses are measured in reference to geographical
meridians that point toward TN, and these courses are
maintained by reference to the compass that points along a
magnetic meridian in the general direction of MN, the true
direction must be converted into magnetic direction for the
purpose of flight. This conversion is made by adding or
subtracting the variation indicated by the nearest isogonic
line on the chart.
For example, a line drawn between two points on a chart
is called a TC as it is measured from TN. However, flying
this course off the magnetic compass would not provide an
accurate course between the two points due to three elements
that must be considered. The first is magnetic variation, the
second is compass deviation, and the third is wind correction.
All three must be considered for accurate navigation.
Magnetic Variation
As mentioned in the paragraph discussing variation, the
appropriate variation for the geographical location of
the flight must be considered and added or subtracted as
appropriate. If flying across an area where the variation
changes, then the values must be applied along the route of
flight appropriately. Once applied, this new course is called
the magnetic course.
Magnetic Deviation
Because each aircraft has its own internal effect upon the
onboard compass systems from its own localized magnetic
influencers, the pilot must add or subtract these influencers
based upon the direction he or she is flying. The application of
deviation (taken from a compass deviation card) compensates
the magnetic course unique to that aircraft’s compass system
(as affected by localized magnetic influencers) and it now
becomes the compass course. Therefore, the compass course,
when followed (in a no wind condition), takes the aircraft
from point A to point B even though the aircraft heading
may not match the original course line drawn on the chart.
If the variation is shown as “9° E,” this means that MN is
9° east of TN. If a TC of 360° is to be flown, 9° must be
subtracted from 360°, which results in a magnetic heading
of 351°. To fly east, a magnetic course of 081° (090° – 9°)
would be flown. To fly south, the magnetic course would be
171° (180° – 9°). To fly west, it would be 261° (270° – 9°).
To fly a TH of 060°, a magnetic course of 051° (060° – 9°)
would be flown.

Figure 16-11. Magnetized portions of the airplane cause the
compass to deviate from its normal indications.
Magnetic North
Magnetic North
Magnetic North
Magnetized engine
Figure 16-12. Compass deviation card.
For (Magnetic)
Steer (Compass)
For (Magnetic
Steer (Compass)
Remember, if variation is west, add; if east, subtract. One
method for remembering whether to add or subtract variation
is the phrase “east is least (subtract) and west is best (add).”
Deviation
Determining the magnetic heading is an intermediate step
necessary to obtain the correct compass heading for the flight.
To determine compass heading, a correction for deviation
must be made. Because of magnetic influences within an
aircraft, such as electrical circuits, radio, lights, tools, engine,
and magnetized metal parts, the compass needle is frequently
deflected from its normal reading. This deflection is called
deviation. The deviation is different for each aircraft, and
it also may vary for different headings in the same aircraft.
For instance, if magnetism in the engine attracts the north
end of the compass, there would be no effect when the plane
is on a heading of MN. On easterly or westerly headings,
however, the compass indications would be in error, as shown
in Figure 16-11. Magnetic attraction can come from many
other parts of the aircraft; the assumption of attraction in the
engine is merely used for the purpose of illustration.
Some adjustment of the compass, referred to as compensation,
can be made to reduce this error, but the remaining correction
must be applied by the pilot.
Proper compensation of the compass is best performed by
a competent technician. Since the magnetic forces within
the aircraft change because of landing shocks, vibration,
mechanical work, or changes in equipment, the pilot should
occasionally have the deviation of the compass checked. The
procedure used to check the deviation is called “swinging the
compass” and is briefly outlined as follows.
The aircraft is placed on a magnetic compass rose, the engine
started, and electrical devices normally used (such as radio)
are turned on. Tailwheel-type aircraft should be jacked up into
flying position. The aircraft is aligned with MN indicated on
the compass rose and the reading shown on the compass is
recorded on a deviation card. The aircraft is then aligned at
30° intervals and each reading is recorded. If the aircraft is to
be flown at night, the lights are turned on and any significant
changes in the readings are noted. If so, additional entries
are made for use at night. The accuracy of the compass can
also be checked by comparing the compass reading with the
known runway headings.
A deviation card, similar to Figure 16-12, is mounted near
the compass showing the addition or subtraction required to
correct for deviation on various headings, usually at intervals
of 30°. For intermediate readings, the pilot should be able to
interpolate mentally with sufficient accuracy. For example,
if the pilot needed the correction for 195° and noted the
correction for 180° to be 0° and for 210° to be +2°, it could
be assumed that the correction for 195° would be +1°. The
magnetic heading, when corrected for deviation, is known
as compass heading.
Effect of Wind
The preceding discussion explained how to measure a TC
on the aeronautical chart and how to make corrections for
variation and deviation, but one important factor has not
been considered—wind. As discussed in the study of the
atmosphere, wind is a mass of air moving over the surface of
the Earth in a definite direction. When the wind is blowing
from the north at 25 knots, it simply means that air is moving
southward over the Earth’s surface at the rate of 25 NM in
1 hour.
Under these conditions, any inert object free from contact
with the Earth is carried 25 NM southward in 1 hour. This
effect becomes apparent when such things as clouds, dust,
and toy balloons are observed being blown along by the wind.
Obviously, an aircraft flying within the moving mass of air
is similarly affected. Even though the aircraft does not float
freely with the wind, it moves through the air at the same
time the air is moving over the ground, and thus is affected
by wind. Consequently, at the end of 1 hour of flight, the
aircraft is in a position that results from a combination of
the following two motions:

Figure 16-13. Motion of the air affects the speed with which aircraft
move over the Earth’s surface. Airspeed, the rate at which an
aircraft moves through the air, is not affected by air motion.
090°
Groundspeed 120 knots
WINDS ARE CALM
090°
Groundspeed 140 knots
WINDS 270° AT 20 KNOTS
090°
Groundspeed 100 knots
WINDS 090° AT 20 KNOTS
Movement of the air mass in reference to the ground
Forward movement of the aircraft through the air mass
Actually, these two motions are independent. It makes no
difference whether the mass of air through which the aircraft
is flying is moving or is stationary. A pilot flying in a 70knot gale would be totally unaware of any wind (except for
possible turbulence) unless the ground were observed. In
reference to the ground, however, the aircraft would appear
to fly faster with a tailwind or slower with a headwind, or to
drift right or left with a crosswind.

As shown in Figure 16-13, an aircraft flying eastward at
an airspeed of 120 knots in still air has a groundspeed (GS)
exactly the same—120 knots. If the mass of air is moving
eastward at 20 knots, the airspeed of the aircraft is not
affected, but the progress of the aircraft over the ground is
120 plus 20 or a GS of 140 knots. On the other hand, if the
mass of air is moving westward at 20 knots, the airspeed of
the aircraft remains the same, but GS becomes 120 minus
20 or 100 knots.
Assuming no correction is made for wind effect, if an aircraft
is heading eastward at 120 knots and the air mass moving
southward at 20 knots, the aircraft at the end of 1 hour is
almost 120 miles east of its point of departure because of its
progress through the air. It is 20 miles south because of the
motion of the air. Under these circumstances, the airspeed
remains 120 knots, but the GS is determined by combining
the movement of the aircraft with that of the air mass. GS can
be measured as the distance from the point of departure to
the position of the aircraft at the end of 1 hour. The GS can
be computed by the time required to fly between two points a
known distance apart. It also can be determined before flight
by constructing a wind triangle, which is explained later in
this chapter. [Figure 16-14]
The direction in which the aircraft is pointing as it flies is
called heading. Its actual path over the ground, which is a
combination of the motion of the aircraft and the motion of
the air, is called track. The angle between the heading and
the track is called drift angle. If the aircraft heading coincides
with the TC and the wind is blowing from the left, the track
does not coincide with the TC. The wind causes the aircraft
to drift to the right, so the track falls to the right of the desired
course or TC. [Figure 16-15]
The following method is used by many pilots to determine
compass heading: after the TC is measured, and wind
correction applied resulting in a TH, the sequence TH ±
variation (V) = magnetic heading (MH) ± deviation (D)
= compass heading (CH) is followed to arrive at compass
heading. [Figure 16-16]
By determining the amount of drift, the pilot can counteract
the effect of the wind and make the track of the aircraft
coincide with the desired course. If the mass of air is moving
across the course from the left, the aircraft drifts to the
right, and a correction must be made by heading the aircraft
sufficiently to the left to offset this drift. In other words, if
the wind is from the left, the correction is made by pointing
the aircraft to the left a certain number of degrees, therefore
correcting for wind drift. This is the wind correction angle
(WCA) and is expressed in terms of degrees right or left of
the TC. [Figure 16-17]

Figure 16-15. Effects of wind drift on maintaining desired course.
Heading
Wind
Track
Drift angle
Desired course
Figure 16-16. Relationship between true, magnetic, and compass
headings for a particular instance.
Heading
TN
MN
CN
-
°
H-
°
H-
°
VAR 10° E
DEV 4°
Figure 16-14. Aircraft flight path resulting from its airspeed and direction and the wind speed and direction.
Airspeed effect (1 hour)
20 knots
Distance covered over ground (1 hour)
To summarize:
Course—intended path of an aircraft over the ground
or the direction of a line drawn on a chart representing
the intended aircraft path, expressed as the angle
measured from a specific reference datum clockwise
from 0° through 360° to the line.
Heading—direction in which the nose of the aircraft
points during flight.
Track—actual path made over the ground in flight. (If
proper correction has been made for the wind, track
and course are identical.)
Drift angle—angle between heading and track.
WCA—correction applied to the course to establish
a heading so that track coincides with course.
Airspeed—rate of the aircraft’s progress through
the air.
GS—rate of the aircraft’s inflight progress over
the ground.

Figure 16-17. Establishing a wind correction angle that counteracts wind drift and maintains the desired course.
Heading
Wind
Track
Wind
correction
angle
Desired course
090°
075°
Basic Calculations
Before a cross-country flight, a pilot should make common
calculations for time, speed, and distance, and the amount
of fuel required.
Converting Minutes to Equivalent Hours
Frequently, it is necessary to convert minutes into equivalent
hours when solving speed, time, and distance problems. To
convert minutes to hours, divide by 60 (60 minutes = 1 hour).
Thus, 30 minutes is 30/60 = 0.5 hour. To convert hours to
minutes, multiply by 60. Thus, 0.75 hour equals 0.75 × 60
= 45 minutes.
Time T = D/GS
To find the time (T) in flight, divide the distance (D) by the
GS. The time to fly 210 NM at a GS of 140 knots is 210 ÷
140 or 1.5 hours. (The 0.5 hour multiplied by 60 minutes
equals 30 minutes.) Answer: 1:30.
Distance D = GS X T
To find the distance flown in a given time, multiply GS by
time. The distance flown in 1 hour 45 minutes at a GS of 120
knots is 120 × 1.75 or 210 NM.
GS GS = D/T
To find the GS, divide the distance flown by the time
required. If an aircraft flies 270 NM in 3 hours, the GS is
270 ÷ 3 = 90 knots.
Converting Knots to Miles Per Hour
Another conversion is that of changing knots to miles per hour
(mph). The aviation industry is using knots more frequently
than mph, but is important to understand the conversion for
those that use mph when working with speed problems. The
NWS reports both surface winds and winds aloft in knots.
However, airspeed indicators in some aircraft are calibrated
in mph (although many are now calibrated in both mph and
knots). Pilots, therefore, should learn to convert wind speeds
that are reported in knots to mph.
A knot is 1 nautical mile per hour (NMPH). Because there are
6,076.1 feet in 1 NM and 5,280 feet in 1 SM, the conversion
factor is 1.15. To convert knots to mph, multiply speed in
knots by 1.15. For example: a wind speed of 20 knots is
equivalent to 23 mph.
Most flight computers or electronic calculators have a
means of making this conversion. Another quick method of
conversion is to use the scales of NM and SM at the bottom
of aeronautical charts.
Fuel Consumption
To ensure that sufficient fuel is available for your intended
flight, you must be able to accurately compute aircraft fuel
consumption during preflight planning. Typically, fuel
consumption in gasoline-fueled aircraft is measured in
gallons per hour. Since turbine engines consume much more
fuel than reciprocating engines, turbine-powered aircraft
require much more fuel, and thus much larger fuel tanks.
When determining these large fuel quantities, using a volume
measurement such as gallons presents a problem because
the volume of fuel varies greatly in relation to temperature.
In contrast, density (weight) is less affected by temperature
and therefore, provides a more uniform and repeatable
measurement. For this reason, jet fuel is generally quantified
by its density and volume.
This standard industry convention yields a pounds-of-fuelper-hour value which, when divided into the nautical miles
(NM) per hour of travel (TAS ± winds) value, results in a
specific range value. The typical label for specific range is
NM per pound of fuel, or often NM per 1,000 pounds of fuel.
Preflight planning should be supported by proper monitoring
of past fuel consumption as well as use of specified fuel
management and mixture adjustment procedures in flight.

For simple aircraft with reciprocating engines, the Aircraft
Flight Manual/Pilot’s Operating Handbook (AFM/POH)
supplied by the aircraft manufacturer provides gallons-perhour values to assist with preflight planning.
When planning a flight, you must determine how much
fuel is needed to reach your destination by calculating the
distance the aircraft can travel (with winds considered) at
a known rate of fuel consumption (gal/hr or lbs/hr) for the
expected groundspeed (GS) and ensure this amount, plus an
adequate reserve, is available on board.  GS determines the
time the flight will take.  The amount of fuel needed for a
given flight can be calculated by multiplying the estimated
flight time by the rate of consumption.  For example, a flight
of 400 NM at 100 knots GS takes 4 hours to complete.  If an
aircraft consumes 5 gallons of fuel per hour, the total fuel
consumption is 20 gallons (4 hours times 5 gallons).  In this
example, there is no wind; therefore, true airspeed (TAS)
is also 100 knots, the same as GS.  Since the rate of fuel
consumption remains relatively constant at a given TAS,
you must use GS to calculate fuel consumption when wind
is present. Specific range (NM/lb or NM/gal) is also useful
in calculating fuel consumption when wind is a factor.
You should always plan to be on the surface before any of
the following occur:
Your flight time exceeds the amount of flight time
you calculated for the consumption of your preflight
fuel amount
Your fuel gauge indicates low fuel level
The rate of fuel consumption depends on many factors:
condition of the engine, propeller/rotor pitch, propeller/
rotor revolutions per minute (rpm), richness of the mixture,
and the percentage of horsepower used for flight at cruising
speed. The pilot should know the approximate consumption
rate from cruise performance charts or from experience.
In addition to the amount of fuel required for the flight,
there should be sufficient fuel for reserve. When estimating
consumption you must plan for cruise flight as well as startup
and taxi, and higher fuel burn during climb. Remember that
ground speed during climb is less than during cruise flight
at the same airspeed. Additional fuel for adequate reserve
should also be added as a safety measure.
Flight Computers
Up to this point, only mathematical formulas have been used
to determine such items as time, distance, speed, and fuel
consumption. In reality, most pilots use a mechanical flight
computer called an E6B or electronic flight calculator. These
devices can compute numerous problems associated with
flight planning and navigation. The mechanical or electronic
computer has an instruction book that probably includes
sample problems so the pilot can become familiar with its
functions and operation. [Figure 16-18]
Plotter
Another aid in flight planning is a plotter, which is a protractor
and ruler. The pilot can use this when determining TC and
measuring distance. Most plotters have a ruler that measures
in both NM and SM and has a scale for a sectional chart on one
side and a world aeronautical chart on the other. [Figure 16-18]
Pilotage
Pilotage is navigation by reference to landmarks or
checkpoints. It is a method of navigation that can be used
on any course that has adequate checkpoints, but it is more
commonly used in conjunction with dead reckoning and
VFR radio navigation.
The checkpoints selected should be prominent features
common to the area of the flight. Choose checkpoints that can
be readily identified by other features, such as roads, rivers,
railroad tracks, lakes, and power lines. If possible, select
features that make useful boundaries or brackets on each
side of the course, such as highways, rivers, railroads, and
mountains. A pilot can keep from drifting too far off course
by referring to and not crossing the selected brackets. Never
place complete reliance on any single checkpoint. Choose
ample checkpoints. If one is missed, look for the next one while
maintaining the heading. When determining position from
checkpoints, remember that the scale of a sectional chart is 1
inch = 8 SM or 6.86 NM. For example, if a checkpoint selected
was approximately one-half inch from the course line on the
chart, it is 4 SM or 3.43 NM from the course on the ground.
In the more congested areas, some of the smaller features are
not included on the chart. If confused, hold the heading. If a
turn is made away from the heading, it is easy to become lost.
Roads shown on the chart are primarily the well-traveled
roads or those most apparent when viewed from the air.
New roads and structures are constantly being built and
may not be shown on the chart until the next chart is issued.
Some structures, such as antennas, may be difficult to see.
Sometimes TV antennas are grouped together in an area near
a town. They are supported by almost invisible guy wires.
Never approach an area of antennas less than 500 feet above
the tallest one. Most of the taller structures are marked with
strobe lights to make them more visible to pilots. However,
some weather conditions or background lighting may make
them difficult to see. Aeronautical charts display the best
information available at the time of printing, but a pilot should
be cautious for new structures or changes that have occurred
since the chart was printed.

INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE
Place hole over intersection of true course and true north line.
Without changing position rotate plotter until edge is over true course line.
From hole follow true north line to curved scale with arrow pointing in direction of flight.
Read true course in degrees, on proper scale, over true north line. read scales counter-clockwise.
SECTIONAL CHART SIDE - 1:500,000
NAVIGATIONAL FLIGHT PLOTTER
NAUTICAL   5  MILES
80  NAUTICAL  85  MILES
0 STATUTE   5  MILES
DEGREES
Mode
Clr
On/Off
Dist
Vol
Wt
Wx
÷
:
x
Sto
−
Rcl
+
Bksp
.
+/-
=
TSD Alt: As Wind Wt. Bal Timer
 Conv: Dist Vol Wt Wx
Plotter
Mechanical flight computer
Electronic flight computer
Figure 16-18. A plotter (A), the computational and wind side of a mechanical flight computer (E6B) (B), and an electronic flight computer (C).
Dead Reckoning
Dead reckoning is navigation solely by means of computations
based on time, airspeed, distance, and direction. The products
derived from these variables, when adjusted by wind speed
and velocity, are heading and GS. The predicted heading
takes the aircraft along the intended path and the GS
establishes the time to arrive at each checkpoint and the
destination. Except for flights over water, dead reckoning
is usually used with pilotage for cross-country flying. The
heading and GS, as calculated, is constantly monitored and
corrected by pilotage as observed from checkpoints.
Wind Triangle or Vector Analysis
If there is no wind, the aircraft’s ground track is the same as
the heading and the GS is the same as the true airspeed. This
condition rarely exists. A wind triangle, the pilot’s version
of vector analysis, is the basis of dead reckoning.
The wind triangle is a graphic explanation of the effect of
wind upon flight. GS, heading, and time for any flight can be
determined by using the wind triangle. It can be applied to
the simplest kind of cross-country flight, as well as the most
complicated instrument flight. The experienced pilot becomes

Heading and airspeed
Course and groundspeed
Wind direction and velocity
Figure 16-20. The wind triangle as is drawn in navigation practice.
080° heading and 120 knots airspeed
090° course and 110 knots groundspeed
    Wind at 20°
  direction and
 35 knots velocity
10°
Drift Angle
8° left correction
Figure 16-19. Principle of the wind triangle.
so familiar with the fundamental principles that estimates can
be made that are adequate for visual flight without actually
drawing the diagrams. The beginning student, however, needs
to develop skill in constructing these diagrams as an aid to the
complete understanding of wind effect. Either consciously or
unconsciously, every good pilot thinks of the flight in terms
of wind triangle.
If flight is to be made on a course to the east, with a wind
blowing from the northeast, the aircraft must be headed
somewhat to the north of east to counteract drift. This can
be represented by a diagram as shown in Figure 16-19. Each
line represents direction and speed. The long blue and white
hashed line shows the direction the aircraft is heading, and
its length represents the distance traveled at the indicated
airspeed for 1 hour. The short blue arrow at the right shows
the wind direction, and its length represents the wind velocity
for 1 hour. The solid yellow line shows the direction of the
track or the path of the aircraft as measured over the earth, and
its length represents the distance traveled in 1 hour or the GS.
In actual practice, the triangle illustrated in Figure 16-19 is
not drawn; instead, construct a similar triangle as shown by
the blue, yellow, and black lines in Figure 16-20, which is
explained in the following example.
Suppose a flight is to be flown from E to P. Draw a line on
the aeronautical chart connecting these two points; measure
its direction with a protractor, or plotter, in reference to a
meridian. This is the TC, which in this example is assumed
to be 090° (east). From the NWS, it is learned that the wind
at the altitude of the intended flight is 40 knots from the
northeast (045°). Since the NWS reports the wind speed in
knots, if the true airspeed of the aircraft is 120 knots, there is
no need to convert speeds from knots to mph or vice versa.
Now, on a plain sheet of paper draw a vertical line representing
north to south. (The various steps are shown in Figure 16-21.)
Step 1
Place the protractor with the base resting on the vertical line
and the curved edge facing east. At the center point of the
base, make a dot labeled “E” (point of departure) and at the
curved edge, make a dot at 90° (indicating the direction of the
true course) and another at 45° (indicating wind direction).

Figure 16-21. Steps in drawing the wind triangle.
Airspeed 120 knots
TC 090° GS 88
TC 090°
Wind
Mid point
STEP 1
STEP 4
STEP 2 and 3

°

°
Step 2
With the ruler, draw the true course line from E, extending it
somewhat beyond the dot by 90°, and labeling it “TC 090°.”
Step 3
Next, align the ruler with E and the dot at 45°, and draw
the wind arrow from E, not toward 045°, but downwind in
the direction the wind is blowing making it 40 units long to
correspond with the wind velocity of 40 knots. Identify this
line as the wind line by placing the letter “W” at the end to
show the wind direction.
Step 4
Finally, measure 120 units on the ruler to represent the
airspeed, making a dot on the ruler at this point. The units
used may be of any convenient scale or value (such as ¼
inch = 10 knots), but once selected, the same scale must
be used for each of the linear movements involved. Then
place the ruler so that the end is on the arrowhead (W) and
the 120-knot dot intercepts the TC line. Draw the line and
label it “AS 120.” The point “P” placed at the intersection
represents the position of the aircraft at the end of 1 hour.
The diagram is now complete.
The distance flown in 1 hour (GS) is measured as the numbers
of units on the TC line (88 NMPH or 88 knots). The TH
necessary to offset drift is indicated by the direction of the
airspeed line, which can be determined in one of two ways:
By placing the straight side of the protractor along
the north-south line, with its center point at the
intersection of the airspeed line and north-south line,
read the TH directly in degrees (076°). [Figure 16-22]
By placing the straight side of the protractor along the
TC line, with its center at P, read the angle between
the TC and the airspeed line. This is the WCA, which
must be applied to the TC to obtain the TH. If the wind
blows from the right of TC, the angle is added; if from
the left, it is subtracted. In the example given, the
WCA is 14° and the wind is from the left; therefore,
subtract 14° from TC of 090°, making the TH 076°.
[Figure 16-23]
After obtaining the TH, apply the correction for magnetic
variation to obtain magnetic heading and the correction
for compass deviation to obtain a compass heading. The
compass heading can be used to fly to the destination by
dead reckoning.
To determine the time and fuel required for the flight, first
find the distance to your destination by measuring the length
of the course line drawn on the aeronautical chart (using the
appropriate scale at the bottom of the chart). If the distance
measures 220 NM, divide by the GS of 88 knots, which gives
2.5 hours, or 2:30, as the time required. If fuel consumption
is 8 gallons an hour, 8 × 2.5 or about 20 gallons is used.

Figure 16-23. Finding true heading by direct measurement.
TH 076° AS 120
TC 090° GS 88

°

WCA =14° L
Figure 16-22. Finding true heading by the wind correction angle.
TH 076° AS 120
TC 090° GS 88

°

Briefly summarized, the steps in obtaining flight information
are as follows:
TC—direction of the line connecting two desired
points, drawn on the chart and measured clockwise
in degrees from TN on the mid-meridian
WCA—determined from the wind triangle. (Added
to TC if the wind is from the right; subtracted if wind
is from the left)
TH—direction measured in degrees clockwise from
TN, in which the nose of the plane should point to
remain on the desired course
Variation—obtained from the isogonic line on the
chart (added to TH if west; subtracted if east)
MH—an intermediate step in the conversion (obtained
by applying variation to TH)
Deviation—obtained from the deviation card on the
aircraft (added to or subtracted from MH, as indicated)
Compass heading—reading on the compass (found by
applying deviation to MH) that is followed to remain
on the desired course

Figure 16-24. Chart Supplement U.S. (formerly Airport/Facility
Directory).
Total distance—obtained by measuring the length of
the TC line on the chart (using the scale at the bottom
of the chart)
GS—obtained by measuring the length of the TC line
on the wind triangle (using the scale employed for
drawing the diagram)
Estimated time en route (ETE)—total distance divided
by GS
Fuel rate—predetermined gallons per hour used at
cruising speed

NOTE: Additional fuel for adequate reserve should be added
as a safety measure.
Flight Planning
Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR) part
91 states, in part, that before beginning a flight, the pilot in
command (PIC) of an aircraft shall become familiar with all
available information concerning that flight. For flights not
in the vicinity of an airport, this must include information
on available current weather reports and forecasts, fuel
requirements, alternatives available if the planned flight
cannot be completed, and any known traffic delays of which
the PIC has been advised by ATC.
Assembling Necessary Material
The pilot should collect the necessary material well before
beginning the flight. An appropriate current sectional chart
and charts for areas adjoining the flight route should be among
this material if the route of flight is near the border of a chart.
Additional equipment should include a flight computer or
electronic calculator, plotter, and any other item appropriate
to the particular flight. For example, if a night flight is to
be undertaken, carry a flashlight; if a flight is over desert
country, carry a supply of water and other necessities.
Weather Check
It is wise to check the weather before continuing with other
aspects of flight planning to see, first of all, if the flight is
feasible and, if it is, which route is best. Chapter 12, “Aviation
Weather Services,” discusses obtaining a weather briefing.
Use of Chart Supplement U.S. (formerly Airport/
Facility Directory)
Study available information about each airport at which a
landing is intended. This should include a study of the Notices
to Airmen (NOTAMs) and the Chart Supplement U.S.
(formerly Airport/Facility Directory). [Figure 16-24] This
includes location, elevation, runway and lighting facilities,
available services, availability of aeronautical advisory
station frequency (UNICOM), types of fuel available (use to
decide on refueling stops), FSS located on the airport, control
tower and ground control frequencies, traffic information,
remarks, and other pertinent information. The NOTAMs,
issued every 28 days, should be checked for additional
information on hazardous conditions or changes that have
been made since issuance of the Chart Supplement U.S.
The sectional chart bulletin subsection should be checked for
major changes that have occurred since the last publication date
of each sectional chart being used. Remember, the chart may
be up to 6 months old. The effective date of the chart appears
at the top of the front of the chart. The Chart Supplement U.S.
generally has the latest information pertaining to such matters
and should be used in preference to the information on the
back of the chart, if there are differences.
Airplane Flight Manual or Pilot’s Operating
Handbook (AFM/POH)
The Aircraft Flight Manual or Pilot’s Operating Handbook
(AFM/POH) should be checked to determine the proper
loading of the aircraft (weight and balance data). The weight
of the usable fuel and drainable oil aboard must be known.
Also, check the weight of the passengers, the weight of all
baggage to be carried, and the empty weight of the aircraft to
be sure that the total weight does not exceed the maximum
allowable weight. The distribution of the load must be known
to tell if the resulting center of gravity (CG) is within limits.

Be sure to use the latest weight and balance information in
the FAA-approved AFM or other permanent aircraft records,
as appropriate, to obtain empty weight and empty weight
CG information.
Determine the takeoff and landing distances from the
appropriate charts, based on the calculated load, elevation
of the airport, and temperature; then compare these distances
with the amount of runway available. Remember, the
heavier the load and the higher the elevation, temperature,
or humidity, the longer the takeoff roll and landing roll and
the lower the rate of climb.
Check the fuel consumption charts to determine the rate of
fuel consumption at the estimated flight altitude and power
settings. Calculate the rate of fuel consumption, and compare
it with the estimated time for the flight so that refueling points
along the route can be included in the plan.
Charting the Course
Once the weather has been checked and some preliminary
planning completed, it is time to chart the course and
determine the data needed to accomplish the flight. The
following sections provide a logical sequence to follow in
charting the course, complete a flight log, and filing a flight
plan. In the following example, a trip is planned based on the
following data and the sectional chart excerpt in Figure 16-25.
Route of flight: Chickasha Airport direct to Guthrie Airport
 True airspeed (TAS)........................................115 knots
 Winds aloft...........................................360° at 10 knots
 Usable fuel.....................................................38 gallons
 Fuel rate...............................................................8 GPH
 Deviation..................................................................+2°
Steps in Charting the Course
The following is a suggested sequence for arriving at the
pertinent information for the trip. As information is determined,
it may be noted as illustrated in the example of a flight log in
Figure 16-26. Where calculations are required, the pilot may
use a mathematical formula or a manual or electronic flight
computer. If unfamiliar with the use of a manual or electronic
computer, it would be advantageous to read the operation
manual and work several practice problems at this point.
First, draw a line from Chickasha Airport (point A) directly
to Guthrie Airport (point F). The course line should begin at
the center of the airport of departure and end at the center of
the destination airport. If the route is direct, the course line
consists of a single straight line. If the route is not direct, it
consists of two or more straight line segments. For example, a
VOR station that is off the direct route, but makes navigating
easier, may be chosen (radio navigation is discussed later in
this chapter).
Appropriate checkpoints should be selected along the route
and noted in some way. These should be easy-to-locate
points, such as large towns, large lakes and rivers, or
combinations of recognizable points, such as towns with
an airport, towns with a network of highways, and railroads
entering and departing.
Normally, choose only towns indicated by splashes of yellow
on the chart. Do not choose towns represented by a small
circle—these may turn out to be only a half-dozen houses. (In
isolated areas, however, towns represented by a small circle
can be prominent checkpoints.) For this trip, four checkpoints
have been selected. Checkpoint 1 consists of a tower located
east of the course and can be further identified by the highway
and railroad track, which almost parallels the course at this
point. Checkpoint 2 is the obstruction just to the west of the
course and can be further identified by Will Rogers World
Airport, which is directly to the east. Checkpoint 3 is Wiley
Post Airport, which the aircraft should fly directly over.
Checkpoint 4 is a private, non-surfaced airport to the west of
the course and can be further identified by the railroad track
and highway to the east of the course.
The course and areas on either side of the planned route
should be checked to determine if there is any type of airspace
with which the pilot should be concerned or which has
special operational requirements. For this trip, it should be
noted that the course passes through a segment of the Class
C airspace surrounding Will Rogers World Airport where the
floor of the airspace is 2,500 feet mean sea level (MSL) and
the ceiling is 5,300 feet MSL (point B). Also, there is Class
D airspace from the surface to 3,800 feet MSL surrounding
Wiley Post Airport (point C) during the time the control
tower is in operation.
Study the terrain and obstructions along the route. This is
necessary to determine the highest and lowest elevations,
as well as the highest obstruction to be encountered so
an appropriate altitude that conforms to 14 CFR part 91
regulations can be selected. If the flight is to be flown
at an altitude of more than 3,000 feet above the terrain,
conformance to the cruising altitude appropriate to the
direction of flight is required. Check the route for particularly
rugged terrain so it can be avoided. Areas where a takeoff
or landing is made should be carefully checked for tall
obstructions. Television transmitting towers may extend to
altitudes over 1,500 feet above the surrounding terrain. It is
essential that pilots be aware of their presence and location.
For this trip, it should be noted that the tallest obstruction is

Figure 16-25. Sectional chart excerpt.
Checkpoint
Checkpoint
Checkpoint
Checkpoint
Class C Airspace
Class D Airspace
Tallest obstruction
Highest elevation E
Route of flight: Chickasha Airport direct to Guthrie Airport
True airspeed (TAS)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115 knots
Winds aloft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 360° at 10 knots
Usable fuel  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38 gallons
Fuel rate  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8 GPH
Deviation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . +2°
Course line

Figure 16-26. Pilot’s planning sheet and visual flight log.
PILOT’S PLANNING SHEET
COURSE
TC
TH
MH DEV CH
GS
From
To
From
To
WIND
Knots
From
WCA
R+ LMAG VAR
W+ ETOTAL
MILES
TOTAL
TIME
FUEL
RATE
TOTAL
FUEL
PLANE IDENTIFICATION
DATE
ALTITUDE
     Chickasha
Guthrie
031°
10 360°
3° L 28
7° E
21° +2° 23
106 kts
35 min
8 GPH
38 gal
N123DB
VISUAL FLIGHT LOG
WEATHER
AIRSPACE ETC.
POINT OF
DEPARTURE
Chickasha Airport
Guthrie Airport
TIME OF
DEPARTURE
DESTINATION
DISTANCE
GS
ELAPSED TIME
COURSE
CH
REMARKS
NAVAID
IDENT.
FREQ.
NAVIGATION
AIDS
CHECKPOINT
#1
CHECKPOINT
#2
CHECKPOINT
#3
CHECKPOINT
#4
TO
FROM
TO
FROM
POINT TO POINT
CUMULATIVE
ACTUAL
ESTIMATED
ACTUAL
ESTIMATED
ACTUAL
ESTIMATED
11 NM
10 NM
10.5 NM
13 NM
8.5 NM
6 min
+5
6 min
6 min
7 min
5 min
106 kts
106 kts
106 kts
106 kts
023°
023°
023°
023°
21 NM
31.5 NM
44.5 NM
53 NM
ALTITUDE
part of a series of antennas with a height of 2,749 feet MSL
(point D). The highest elevation should be located in the
northeast quadrant and is 2,900 feet MSL (point E).
Since the wind is no factor and it is desirable and within the
aircraft’s capability to fly above the Class C and D airspace
to be encountered, an altitude of 5,500 feet MSL is chosen.
This altitude also gives adequate clearance of all obstructions,
as well as conforms to the 14 CFR part 91 requirement to
fly at an altitude of odd thousand plus 500 feet when on a
magnetic course between 0 and 179°.
Next, the pilot should measure the total distance of the
course, as well as the distance between checkpoints. The total
distance is 53 NM, and the distance between checkpoints is
as noted on the flight log in Figure 16-26.
After determining the distance, the TC should be measured.
If using a plotter, follow the directions on the plotter. The TC
is 031°. Once the TH is established, the pilot can determine
the compass heading. This is done by following the formula
given earlier in this chapter.
The formula is:
TC ± WCA = TH ± V = MH ± D = CH
The WCA can be determined by using a manual or electronic
flight computer. Using a wind of 360° at 10 knots, it is
determined the WCA is 3° left. This is subtracted from the
TC making the TH 28°. Next, the pilot should locate the
isogonic line closest to the route of the flight to determine
variation. Figure 16-25 shows the variation to be 6.30° E
(rounded to 7° E), which means it should be subtracted from
the TH, giving an MH of 21°. Next, add 2° to the MH for
the deviation correction. This gives the pilot the compass
heading of 23°.
Now, the GS can be determined. This is done using a manual
or electronic calculator. The GS is determined to be 106
knots. Based on this information, the total trip time, as well
as time between checkpoints, and the fuel burned can be
determined. These numbers can be calculated by using a
manual or electronic calculator.

Figure 16-27. Domestic flight plan form.
X
N123DB                C150/X                 115            CHK, CHICKASHA
AIRPORT                          1400                                  5500
Chickasha direct Guthrie
GOK, Guthrie Airport
Guthrie, OK
4               45
Jane Smith
Aero Air, Oklahoma City, OK (405) 555-4149
Red/White
McAlester
For this trip, the GS is 106 knots and the total time is 35
minutes (30 minutes plus 5 minutes for climb) with a fuel
burn of 4.7 gallons. Refer to the flight log in Figure 16-26
for the time between checkpoints.
As the trip progresses, the pilot can note headings and time
and make adjustments in heading, GS, and time.
Filing a VFR Flight Plan
Filing a flight plan is not required by regulations; however, it
is a good operating practice since the information contained
in the flight plan can be used in search and rescue in the
event of an emergency.
Flight plans can be filed in the air by radio, but it is best to
file a flight plan by phone just before departing. After takeoff,
contact the FSS by radio and give them the takeoff time so
the flight plan can be activated.
When a VFR flight plan is filed, it is held by the FSS until
1 hour after the proposed departure time and then canceled
unless: the actual departure time is received; a revised
proposed departure time is received; or at the time of filing,
the FSS is informed that the proposed departure time is
met, but actual time cannot be given because of inadequate
communication. The FSS specialist who accepts the flight
plan does not inform the pilot of this procedure, however.
Figure 16-27 shows the flight plan form a pilot files with the
FSS. When filing a flight plan by telephone or radio, give
the information in the order of the numbered spaces. This
enables the FSS specialist to copy the information more
efficiently. Most of the fields are either self-explanatory
or non-applicable to the VFR flight plan (such as item 13).
However, some fields may need explanation.
Item 3 is the aircraft type and special equipment. An
example would be C-150/X, which means the aircraft
has no transponder. A listing of special equipment
codes is found in the Aeronautical Information Manual
(AIM).
Item 6 is the proposed departure time in UTC
(indicated by the “Z”).
Item 7 is the cruising altitude. Normally, “VFR” can be
entered in this block since the pilot chooses a cruising
altitude to conform to FAA regulations.

Figure 16-28. VHF transmissions follow a line-of-sight course.
“A” and “B” signal
received
Neither “A” nor “B”
signal received
Only “A” signal received
Only “B” signal received
VOR
station
“A”
VOR
station
“B”
Item 8 is the route of flight. If the flight is to be direct,
enter the word “direct;” if not, enter the actual route to
be followed, such as via certain towns or navigation
aids.
Item 10 is the estimated time en route. In the sample
flight plan, 5 minutes was added to the total time to
allow for the climb.
Item 12 is the fuel on board in hours and minutes. This
is determined by dividing the total usable fuel aboard
in gallons by the estimated rate of fuel consumption
in gallons.
Remember, there is every advantage in filing a flight plan;
but do not forget to close the flight plan upon arrival. This
should be done via telephone to avoid radio congestion.
Ground-Based Navigation
Advances in navigational radio receivers installed in aircraft,
the development of aeronautical charts that show the exact
location of ground transmitting stations and their frequencies,
along with refined flight deck instrumentation make it
possible for pilots to navigate with precision to almost any
point desired. Although precision in navigation is obtainable
through the proper use of this equipment, beginning pilots
should use this equipment to supplement navigation by visual
reference to the ground (pilotage). This method provides the
pilot with an effective safeguard against disorientation in the
event of radio malfunction.
There are three radio navigation systems available for use
for VFR navigation. These are:
VHF Omnidirectional Range (VOR)
Nondirectional Radio Beacon (NDB)
Global Positioning System (GPS)
Very High Frequency (VHF) Omnidirectional
Range (VOR)
The VOR system is present in three slightly different
navigation aids (NAVAIDs): VOR, VOR/distance measuring
equipment (DME)(discussed in a later section), and
VORTAC. By itself it is known as a VOR, and it provides
magnetic bearing information to and from the station. When
DME is also installed with a VOR, the NAVAID is referred
to as a VOR/DME. When military tactical air navigation
(TACAN) equipment is installed with a VOR, the NAVAID
is known as a VORTAC. DME is always an integral part of
a VORTAC. Regardless of the type of NAVAID utilized
(VOR, VOR/DME, or VORTAC), the VOR indicator
behaves the same. Unless otherwise noted in this section,
VOR, VOR/DME, and VORTAC NAVAIDs are all referred
to hereafter as VORs.
The prefix “omni-” means all, and an omnidirectional range
is a VHF radio transmitting ground station that projects
straight line courses (radials) from the station in all directions.
From a top view, it can be visualized as being similar to the
spokes from the hub of a wheel. The distance VOR radials are
projected depends upon the power output of the transmitter.
The course or radials projected from the station are referenced
to MN. Therefore, a radial is defined as a line of magnetic
bearing extending outward from the VOR station. Radials are
identified by numbers beginning with 001, which is 1° east
of MN and progress in sequence through all the degrees of a
circle until reaching 360. To aid in orientation, a compass rose
reference to magnetic north is superimposed on aeronautical
charts at the station location.
VOR ground stations transmit within a VHF frequency band
of 108.0–117.95 MHz. Because the equipment is VHF, the
signals transmitted are subject to line-of-sight restrictions.
Therefore, its range varies in direct proportion to the altitude
of receiving equipment. Generally, the reception range of
the signals at an altitude of 1,000 feet above ground level
(AGL) is about 40 to 45 miles. This distance increases with
altitude. [Figure 16-28]

VORs and VORTACs are classed according to operational
use. There are three classes:
T (Terminal)
L (Low altitude)
H (High altitude)
The normal useful range for the various classes is shown in
the following table:
VOR/VORTAC NAVAIDS
Normal Usable Altitudes and Radius Distances

D i s t a n c e
 Class
  Altitudes

( M i l e s )

12,000' and below

Below 18,000'

Below 14,500'

Within the conterminous 48 states

only, between 14,500 and 17,999' 	  100

18,000'—FL 450

FL 450—60,000'

The useful ra
