In aviation, weather service is a combined effort of the
National Weather Service (NWS), Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), Department of Defense (DOD), other
aviation groups, and individuals. Because of the increasing
need for worldwide weather services, foreign weather
organizations also provide vital input.
While weather forecasts are not 100 percent accurate,
meteorologists, through careful scientific study and computer
modeling, have the ability to predict weather patterns, trends,
and characteristics with increasing accuracy. Through a
complex system of weather services, government agencies,
and independent weather observers, pilots and other aviation
professionals receive the benefit of this vast knowledge base
in the form of up-to-date weather reports and forecasts.
These reports and forecasts enable pilots to make informed
decisions regarding weather and flight safety before and
during a flight.
Aviation Weather Services
Chapter 13

Observations
The data gathered from surface and upper altitude
observations form the basis of all weather forecasts,
advisories, and briefings. There are four types of weather
observations: surface, upper air, radar, and satellite.
Surface Aviation Weather Observations
Surface aviation weather observations (METARs) are a
compilation of elements of the current weather at individual
ground stations across the United States. The network is
made up of government and privately contracted facilities
that provide continuous up-to-date weather information.
Automated weather sources, such as the Automated Weather
Observing Systems (AWOS), Automated Surface Observing
Systems (ASOS), as well as other automated facilities, also
play a major role in the gathering of surface observations.
Surface observations provide local weather conditions
and other relevant information for a specific airport. This
information includes the type of report, station identifier,
date and time, modifier (as required), wind, visibility,
runway visual range (RVR), weather phenomena, sky
condition, temperature/dew point, altimeter reading, and
applicable remarks. The information gathered for the surface
observation may be from a person, an automated station, or
an automated station that is updated or enhanced by a weather
observer. In any form, the surface observation provides
valuable information about individual airports around the
country. Although the reports cover only a small radius, the
pilot can generate a good picture of the weather over a wide
area when many reporting stations are viewed together.
Air Route Traffic Control Center (ARTCC)
The Air Route Traffic Control Center (ARTCC) facilities
are responsible for maintaining separation between flights
conducted under instrument flight rules (IFR) in the en
route structure. Center radars (Air Route Surveillance Radar
(ARSR)) acquire and track transponder returns using the same
basic technology as terminal radars. Earlier center radars
displayed weather as an area of slashes (light precipitation)
and Hs (moderate rainfall). Because the controller could not
detect higher levels of precipitation, pilots had to be wary
of areas showing moderate rainfall. Newer radar displays
show weather as three shades of blue. Controllers can select
the level of weather to be displayed. Weather displays of
higher levels of intensity make it difficult for controllers to
see aircraft data blocks, so pilots should not expect air traffic
control (ATC) to keep weather displayed continuously.
Upper Air Observations
Observations of upper air weather are more challenging
than surface observations. There are several methods by
which upper air weather phenomena can be observed:
radiosonde observations, pilot weather reports (PIREPs),
Aircraft Meteorological Data Relay (AMDAR) and the
Meteorological Data Collection and Reporting System
(MDCRS). A radiosonde is a small cubic instrumentation
package that is suspended below a six foot hydrogen- or
helium-filled balloon. Once released, the balloon rises at a rate
of approximately 1,000 feet per minute (fpm). As it ascends,
the instrumentation gathers various pieces of data, such as air
temperature, moisture, and pressure, as well as wind speed
and direction. Once the information is gathered, it is relayed
to ground stations via a 300 milliwatt radio transmitter.
The balloon flight can last as long as 2 hours or more and
can ascend to altitudes as high as 115,000 feet and drift as
far as 125 miles. The temperatures and pressures experienced
during the flight can be as low as -130 °F and pressures as
low as a few thousandths of what is experienced at sea level.
Since the pressure decreases as the balloon rises in the
atmosphere, the balloon expands until it reaches the limits
of its elasticity. This point is reached when the diameter has
increased to over 20 feet. At this point, the balloon pops and
the radiosonde falls back to Earth. The descent is slowed by
means of a parachute. The parachute aids in protecting people
and objects on the ground. Each year over 75,000 balloons
are launched. Of that number, 20 percent are recovered and
returned for reconditioning. Return instructions are printed
on the side of each radiosonde.
Pilots also provide vital information regarding upper air
weather observations and remain the only real-time source
of information regarding turbulence, icing, and cloud
heights. This information is gathered and filed by pilots
in flight. Together, PIREPs and radiosonde observations
provide information on upper air conditions important for
flight planning. Many domestic and international airlines
have equipped their aircraft with instrumentation that
automatically transmits in flight weather observations
through the DataLink system.
The Aircraft Meteorological Data Relay (AMDAR) is
an international program utilizing commercial aircraft to
provide automated weather observations. The AMDAR
program provides approximately 220,000-230,000 aircraft
observations per day on a worldwide basis utilizing aircraft
onboard sensors and probes that measure wind, temperature,
humidity/water vapor, turbulence and icing data. AMDAR
vertical profiles and en route observations provide significant
benefits to the aviation community by enhancing aircraft
safety and operating efficiency through improved weather
analysis and forecasting. The AMDAR program also
contributes to improved short and medium term numerical
weather forecasts for a wide range of services including

Weather Radar Echo Intensity
Light
Moderate
Heavy
Extreme
Reflectivity (dBZ) Ranges
<30 dBZ
30–40 dBZ
>40–50
50+ dBZ
Figure 13-3. WSR-88D Weather Radar Precipitation Intensity
Terminology.
Figure 13-1. Example of a weather radar scope.
Figure 13-2. WSR-88D Weather Radar Echo Intensity Legend.
severe weather, defense, marine, public weather and
environmental monitoring. The information is down linked
either via Very High Frequency (VHF) communications
through the Aircraft Communications Addressing and
Reporting System (ACARS) or via satellite link through the
Aircraft to Satellite Data Acquisition and Relay (ASDAR).
The Meteorological Data Collection and Reporting System
(MDCRS) is an automated airborne weather observation
program that is used in the U.S. This program collects and
disseminates real-time upper-air weather observations from
participating airlines. The weather elements are down linked
via ACARS and are managed by Aeronautical Radio, Inc.
(ARINC) who then forwards them in Binary Universal Form
for the Representation of Meteorological Data (BUFR)
format to the NWS and in raw data form to the Earth Science
Research Laboratory (ESRL) and the participating airline.
More than 1,500 aircraft report wind and temperature data
with some of these same aircraft also providing turbulence
and humidity/water vapor information. In conjunction with
avionics manufacturers, each participating airline programs
their equipment to provide certain levels of meteorological
data. The monitoring and collection of climb, en route, and
descent data is accomplished through the aircraft’s Flight Data
Acquisition and Monitoring System (FDAMS) and is then
transmitted via ACARS. When aircraft are out of ACARS
range, reports can be relayed through ASDAR. However, in
most cases, the reports are buffered until the aircraft comes
within ACARS range, at which point they are downloaded.
Radar Observations
There are four types of radars which provide information
about precipitation and wind.
The WSR-88D NEXRAD radar, commonly called
Doppler radar, provides in-depth observations that
inform surrounding communities of impending
weather. Doppler radar has two operational modes:
clear air and precipitation. In clear air mode, the radar
is in its most sensitive operational mode because a
slow antenna rotation allows the radar to sample the
atmosphere longer. Images are updated about every
10 minutes in this mode.

Precipitation targets provide stronger return signals;
therefore, the radar is operated in the Precipitation
mode when precipitation is present. A faster antenna
rotation in this mode allows images to update at
a faster rate, approximately every 4 to 6 minutes.
Intensity values in both modes are measured in
dBZ (decibels of Z) and are depicted in color on the
radar image. [Figure 13-1] Intensities are correlated
to intensity terminology (phraseology) for ATC
purposes. [Figures 13-2 and 13-3]

Symbol indicates HIWAS
Figure 13-4. HIWAS availability is shown on sectional chart.
FAA terminal Doppler weather radar (TDWR),
installed at some major airports around the country,
also aids in providing severe weather alerts and
warnings to ATC. Terminal radar ensures pilots
are aware of wind shear, gust fronts, and heavy
precipitation, all of which are dangerous to arriving
and departing aircraft.
The third type of radar commonly used in the detection
of precipitation is the FAA airport surveillance radar.
This radar is used primarily to detect aircraft, but it
also detects the location and intensity of precipitation,
which is used to route aircraft traffic around severe
weather in an airport environment.
4. 	 Airborne radar is equipment carried by aircraft to
locate weather disturbances. The airborne radars
generally operate in the C or X bands (around 6
GHz or around 10 GHz, respectively) permitting
both penetration of heavy precipitation, required for
determining the extent of thunderstorms, and sufficient
reflection from less intense precipitation.
Satellite
Advancement in satellite technologies has recently allowed
for commercial use to include weather uplinks. Through the
use of satellite subscription services, individuals are now able
to receive satellite transmitted signals that provide near realtime weather information for the North American continent.
Service Outlets
Service outlets are government, government contract, or
private facilities that provide aviation weather services. Several
different government agencies, including the FAA, National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), and the
NWS work in conjunction with private aviation companies
to provide different means of accessing weather information.
Flight Service Station (FSS)
The FSS is the primary source for preflight weather
information. A preflight weather briefing from an FSS can be
obtained 24 hours a day by calling 1-800-WX BRIEF from
anywhere in the United States and Puerto Rico. Telephone
numbers for FSS can be found in the Chart Supplement U.S.
(formerly Airport/Facility Directory) or in the United States
Government section of the telephone book.
The FSS also provides inflight weather briefing services
and weather advisories to flights within the FSS area of
responsibility.
Telephone Information Briefing Service (TIBS)
The Telephone Information Briefing Service (TIBS),
provided by FSS, is a system of automated telephone
recordings of meteorological and aeronautical information.
TIBS provides area and route briefings, airspace procedures,
and special announcements. The recordings are automatically
updated as changes occur. It is designed to be a preliminary
briefing tool and is not intended to replace a standard briefing
from a FSS specialist. The TIBS service can only be accessed
by a touchtone phone. The phone numbers for the TIBS
service are listed in the Chart Supplement U.S. (formerly
Airport/Facility Directory).
Hazardous Inflight Weather Advisory Service
(HIWAS)
Hazardous Inflight Weather Advisory Service (HIWAS),
available in the 48 conterminous states, is an automated
continuous broadcast of hazardous weather information
over selected VOR navigational aids (NAVAIDs). The
broadcasts include advisories such as AIRMETS, SIGMETS,
convective SIGMETS, and urgent PIREPs. The broadcasts
are automatically updated as changes occur. Pilots should
contact a FSS or EFAS for additional information. VORs that
have HIWAS capability are depicted on aeronautical charts
with an “H” in the upper right corner of the identification
box. [Figure 13-4]
Transcribed Weather Broadcast (TWEB) (Alaska
Only)
A continuous automated broadcast of meteorological and
aeronautical data over selected low or medium frequency (L/
MF) and very high frequency (VHF) omnidirectional range
(VOR) NAVAID facilities. The broadcasts are automatically
updated as changes occur. The broadcast contains adverse
conditions, surface weather observations, PIREPS, and
a density altitude statement (if applicable). Recordings
may also include a synopsis, winds aloft forecast, en route
and terminal forecast data, and radar reports. At selected
locations, telephone access to the TWEB has been provided
(TEL-TWEB). Telephone numbers for this service are found

in the Alaska Chart Supplement U.S. (formerly Airport/
Facility Directory). These broadcasts are made available
primarily for preflight and inflight planning, and as such,
should not be considered as a substitute for specialistprovided preflight briefings.
Weather Briefings
Prior to every flight, pilots should gather all information
vital to the nature of the flight. This includes an appropriate
weather briefing obtained from a specialist at a FSS.
For weather specialists to provide an appropriate weather
briefing, they need to know which of the three types of
briefings is needed—standard, abbreviated, or outlook. Other
helpful information is whether the flight is visual flight rules
(VFR) or IFR, aircraft identification and type, departure
point, estimated time of departure (ETD), flight altitude, route
of flight, destination, and estimated time en route (ETE).
This information is recorded in the flight plan system and a
note is made regarding the type of weather briefing provided.
If necessary, it can be referenced later to file or amend a
flight plan. It is also used when an aircraft is overdue or is
reported missing.
Standard Briefing
A standard briefing provides the most complete information
and a more complete weather picture. This type of briefing
should be obtained prior to the departure of any flight and
should be used during flight planning. A standard briefing
provides the following information in sequential order if it
is applicable to the route of flight.
Adverse conditions—this includes information about
adverse conditions that may influence a decision to
cancel or alter the route of flight. Adverse conditions
include significant weather, such as thunderstorms or
aircraft icing, or other important items such as airport
closings.
VFR flight not recommended—if the weather for
the route of flight is below VFR minimums, or if
it is doubtful the flight could be made under VFR
conditions due to the forecast weather, the briefer may
state “VFR flight not recommended.” It is the pilot’s
decision whether or not to continue the flight under
VFR, but this advisory should be weighed carefully.
Synopsis—an overview of the larger weather picture.
Fronts and major weather systems that affect the
general area are provided.
Current conditions—the current ceilings, visibility,
winds, and temperatures. If the departure time is more
than 2 hours away, current conditions are not included
in the briefing.
En route forecast—a summary of the weather forecast
for the proposed route of flight.
Destination forecast—a summary of the expected
weather for the destination airport at the estimated
time of arrival (ETA).
7.
Forecast winds and temperatures aloft—a forecast of
the winds at specific altitudes for the route of flight.
The forecast temperature information aloft is provided
only upon request.
8.
Notices to Airmen (NOTAM)—information pertinent
to the route of flight that has not been published in the
NOTAM publication. Published NOTAM information
is provided during the briefing only when requested.
9.
ATC delays—an advisory of any known ATC delays
that may affect the flight.
10.	 Other information—at the end of the standard briefing,
the FSS specialist provides the radio frequencies
needed to open a flight plan and to contact EFAS. Any
additional information requested is also provided at
this time.
Abbreviated Briefing
An abbreviated briefing is a shortened version of the standard
briefing. It should be requested when a departure has been
delayed or when weather information is needed to update
the previous briefing. When this is the case, the weather
specialist needs to know the time and source of the previous
briefing so the necessary weather information is not omitted
inadvertently. It is always a good idea for the pilot to update
the weather information whenever he/she has additional time.
Outlook Briefing
An outlook briefing should be requested when a planned
departure is 6 hours or more away. It provides initial forecast
information that is limited in scope due to the time frame
of the planned flight. This type of briefing is a good source
of flight planning information that can influence decisions
regarding route of flight, altitude, and ultimately the go/no-go
decision. A prudent pilot requests a follow-up briefing prior
to departure since an outlook briefing generally only contains
information based on weather trends and existing weather in
geographical areas at or near the departure airport. A standard
briefing near the time of departure ensures that the pilot has
the latest information available prior to his/her flight.
Aviation Weather Reports
Aviation weather reports are designed to give accurate
depictions of current weather conditions. Each report
provides current information that is updated at different times.
Some typical reports are METARs and PIREPs.

Aviation Routine Weather Report (METAR)
A METAR is an observation of current surface weather
reported in a standard international format. While the
METAR code has been adopted worldwide, each country is
allowed to make modifications to the code. Normally, these
differences are minor but necessary to accommodate local
procedures or particular units of measure. This discussion of
METAR covers elements used in the United States.
METARs are issued on a regularly scheduled basis unless
significant weather changes have occurred. A special
METAR (SPECI) can be issued at any time between routine
METAR reports.
METAR KGGG 161753Z AUTO 14021G26KT 3/4SM
+TSRA BR BKN008 OVC012CB 18/17 A2970 RMK
PRESFR
A typical METAR report contains the following information
in sequential order:
Type of report—there are two types of METAR
reports. The first is the routine METAR report that is
transmitted on a regular time interval. The second is
the aviation selected SPECI. This is a special report
that can be given at any time to update the METAR for
rapidly changing weather conditions, aircraft mishaps,
or other critical information.
Station identifier—a four-letter code as established by
the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).
In the 48 contiguous states, a unique three-letter
identifier is preceded by the letter “K.” For example,
Gregg County Airport in Longview, Texas, is
identified by the letters “KGGG,” K being the country
designation and GGG being the airport identifier.
In other regions of the world, including Alaska and
Hawaii, the first two letters of the four-letter ICAO
identifier indicate the region, country, or state. Alaska
identifiers always begin with the letters “PA” and
Hawaii identifiers always begin with the letters “PH.”
Station identifiers can be found by calling the FSS, a
NWS office, or by searching various websites such
as DUATS and NOAA's Aviation Weather Aviation
Digital Data Services (ADDS).
Date and time of report—depicted in a six-digit group
(161753Z). The first two digits are the date. The last
four digits are the time of the METAR/SPECI, which
is always given in coordinated universal time (UTC).
A “Z” is appended to the end of the time to denote
the time is given in Zulu time (UTC) as opposed to
local time.
Modifier—denotes that the METAR/SPECI came from
an automated source or that the report was corrected. If
the notation “AUTO” is listed in the METAR/SPECI,
the report came from an automated source. It also lists
“AO1” (for no precipitation discriminator) or “AO2”
(with precipitation discriminator) in the “Remarks”
section to indicate the type of precipitation sensors
employed at the automated station.

When the modifier “COR” is used, it identifies a
corrected report sent out to replace an earlier report
that contained an error (for example: METAR KGGG
161753Z COR).
Wind—reported with five digits (14021KT) unless
the speed is greater than 99 knots, in which case the
wind is reported with six digits. The first three digits
indicate the direction the true wind is blowing from in
tens of degrees. If the wind is variable, it is reported
as “VRB.” The last two digits indicate the speed of
the wind in knots unless the wind is greater than 99
knots, in which case it is indicated by three digits. If
the winds are gusting, the letter “G” follows the wind
speed (G26KT). After the letter “G,” the peak gust
recorded is provided. If the wind direction varies more
than 60° and the wind speed is greater than six knots,
a separate group of numbers, separated by a “V,” will
indicate the extremes of the wind directions.
Visibility—the prevailing visibility (¾ SM) is reported
in statute miles as denoted by the letters “SM.” It is
reported in both miles and fractions of miles. At times,
runway visual range (RVR) is reported following the
prevailing visibility. RVR is the distance a pilot can
see down the runway in a moving aircraft. When RVR
is reported, it is shown with an R, then the runway
number followed by a slant, then the visual range
in feet. For example, when the RVR is reported as
R17L/1400FT, it translates to a visual range of 1,400
feet on runway 17 left.
7.
Weather—can be broken down into two different
categories: qualifiers and weather phenomenon
(+TSRA BR). First, the qualifiers of intensity,
proximity, and the descriptor of the weather are given.
The intensity may be light (–), moderate ( ), or heavy
(+). Proximity only depicts weather phenomena that
are in the airport vicinity. The notation “VC” indicates
a specific weather phenomenon is in the vicinity
of five to ten miles from the airport. Descriptors
are used to describe certain types of precipitation
and obscurations. Weather phenomena may be
reported as being precipitation, obscurations, and
other phenomena, such as squalls or funnel clouds.

Intensity or Proximity 1
Precipitation 3
Obscuration 4
Other 5
Descriptor 2
–
Light
     Moderate (no qualifier)
+   Heavy
VC in the vicinity
MI   Shallow
BC  Patches
DR  Low drifting
BL  Blowing
SH  Showers
TS  Thunderstorms
FZ   Freezing
PR  Partial
DZ Drizzle
RA Rain
SN Snow
SG Snow grains
IC Ice crystals (diamond dust)
PL Ice pellets
GR Hail
GS Small hail or snow pellets
UP *Unknown precipitation
BR Mist
FG Fog
FU Smoke
DU Dust
SA Sand
HZ Haze
PY Spray
VA Volcanic ash
PO  Dust/sand whirls
SQ Squalls
FC  Funnel cloud
+FC Tornado or waterspout
SS Sandstorm
DS Dust storm
The weather groups are constructed by considering columns 1–5 in this table in sequence:
intensity, followed by descriptor, followed by weather phenomena (e.g., heavy rain showers(s) is coded as +SHRA).
* Automated stations only
Qualifier
Weather Phenomena
Figure 13-5. Descriptors and weather phenomena used in a typical METAR.
Contraction
SKC, CLR, FEW
FEW
SCT
BKN
OVC
Sky Cover
Less than 1∕8 (Clear)
1∕8–2∕8 (Few)
³∕8–4∕8 (Scattered)
5∕8–7∕8 (Broken)
8∕8 or (Overcast)
Figure 13-6. Reportable contractions for sky condition.
Descriptions of weather phenomena as they begin or
end and hailstone size are also listed in the “Remarks”
sections of the report. [Figure 13-5]
8.
Sky condition—always reported in the sequence of
amount, height, and type or indefinite ceiling/height
(vertical visibility) (BKN008 OVC012CB, VV003).
The heights of the cloud bases are reported with a
three-digit number in hundreds of feet AGL. Clouds
above 12,000 feet are not detected or reported by an
automated station. The types of clouds, specifically
towering cumulus (TCU) or cumulonimbus (CB)
clouds, are reported with their height. Contractions
are used to describe the amount of cloud coverage and
obscuring phenomena. The amount of sky coverage is
reported in eighths of the sky from horizon to horizon.
[Figure 13-6]
9.
Temperature and dew point—the air temperature and
dew point are always given in degrees Celsius (C) or
(18/17). Temperatures below 0 °C are preceded by
the letter “M” to indicate minus.
10. Altimeter setting—reported as inches of mercury
("Hg) in a four-digit number group (A2970). It is
always preceded by the letter “A.” Rising or falling
pressure may also be denoted in the “Remarks”
sections as “PRESRR” or “PRESFR,” respectively.
11. Zulu time—a term used in aviation for UTC, which
places the entire world on one time standard.
12. Remarks—the remarks section always begins with the
letters “RMK.” Comments may or may not appear in
this section of the METAR. The information contained
in this section may include wind data, variable
visibility, beginning and ending times of particular
phenomenon, pressure information, and various other
information deemed necessary. An example of a
remark regarding weather phenomenon that does not
fit in any other category would be: OCNL LTGICCG.
This translates as occasional lightning in the clouds
and from cloud to ground. Automated stations also use
the remarks section to indicate the equipment needs
maintenance.
METAR KGGG 161753Z AUTO 14021G26KT 3/4SM
+TSRA BR BKN008 OVC012CB 18/17 A2970 RMK
PRESFR

XXX
UA
/OV
/TM
/FL
/TP
/SK
/WX
/TA
/WV
/TB
/IC
/RM
3-letter station identifier
Routine PIREP, UUA-Urgent PIREP.
Location
Time
Altitude/flight level
Type aircraft
Sky cover/cloud layers
Weather
Air temperature in celsius (C)
Wind
Turbulence
Icing
Remarks
Nearest weather reporting location to the reported phenomenon
Use 3-letter NAVAID idents only.
 a. Fix: /OV ABC, /OV ABC 090025.
 b. Fix: /OV ABC 045020-DEF, /OV ABC-DEF-GHI
4 digits in UTC: /TM 0915.
3 digits for hundreds of feet. If not known, use UNKN: /FL095, /FL310, /FLUNKN.
4 digits maximum. If not known, use UNKN: /TP L329, /TP B727, /TP UNKN.
Describe as follows:
 a. Height of cloud base in hundreds of feet. If unknown, use UNKN.
 b. Cloud cover symbol.
 c. Height of cloud tops in hundreds of feet.
Flight visibility reported first:
Use standard weather symbols:
/WX FV02SM RA HZ, /WX FV01SM TSRA.
If below zero, prefix with a hyphen: /TA 15, /TA M06.
Direction in degrees magnetic north and speed in six digits:
/WV270045KT, WV 280110KT.
Use standard contractions for intensity and type (use CAT or CHOP when
appropriate). Include altitude only if different from /FL, /TB EXTRM, /TB
LGT-MOD BLO 090.
Describe using standard intensity and type contractions. Include altitude only if
different than /FL: /IC LGT-MOD RIME, /IC SEV CLR 028-045.
Use free form to clarify the report and type hazardous elements first:
/RM LLWS -15KT SFC-030 DURC RY22 JFK.
Encoding Pilot Weather Reports (PIREPS)
Figure 13-7. PIREP encoding and decoding.
Explanation:
Routine METAR for Gregg County Airport for the 16th
day of the month at 1753Z automated source. Winds are
140 at 21 knots gusting to 26. Visibility is ¾ statute mile.
Thunderstorms with heavy rain and mist. Ceiling is broken
at 800 feet, overcast at 1,200 feet with cumulonimbus clouds.
Temperature 18 °C and dew point 17 °C. Barometric pressure
is 29.70 "Hg and falling rapidly.
Pilot Weather Reports (PIREPs)
PIREPs provide valuable information regarding the
conditions as they actually exist in the air, which cannot be
gathered from any other source. Pilots can confirm the height
of bases and tops of clouds, locations of wind shear and
turbulence, and the location of inflight icing. If the ceiling is
below 5,000 feet, or visibility is at or below five miles, ATC
facilities are required to solicit PIREPs from pilots in the area.
When unexpected weather conditions are encountered, pilots
are encouraged to make a report to a FSS or ATC. When a
pilot weather report is filed, the ATC facility or FSS adds it
to the distribution system to brief other pilots and provide
inflight advisories.

PIREPs are easy to file and a standard reporting form outlines
the manner in which they should be filed. Figure 13-7 shows
the elements of a PIREP form. Item numbers 1 through 5 are
required information when making a report, as well as at least
one weather phenomenon encountered. A PIREP is normally
transmitted as an individual report but may be appended to
a surface report. Pilot reports are easily decoded, and most
contractions used in the reports are self-explanatory.
UA/OV GGG 090025/TM 1450/FL 060/TP C182/SK
080 OVC/WX FV04SM RA/TA 05/WV 270030KT/TB
LGT/RM HVY RAIN
Explanation:
Type: .................................Routine pilot report
Location: ..........................	25 NM out on the 090° radial,

Gregg County VOR
Time: ................................	1450 Zulu
Altitude or Flight Level: 	 6,000 feet
Aircraft Type: ...................	Cessna 182
Sky Cover: ........................	8,000 overcast
Visibility/Weather: ...........	4 miles in rain
Temperature: .....................5 °Celsius
Wind: ................................	270° at 30 knots
Turbulence: .......................Light
Icing: ................................	None reported
Remarks: ..........................	Rain is heavy

7.
Forecast significant weather—weather phenomena
are coded in the TAF reports in the same format as
the METAR.
8.
Forecast sky condition—given in the same format as
the METAR. Only cumulonimbus (CB) clouds are
forecast in this portion of the TAF report as opposed
to CBs and towering cumulus in the METAR.
9.
Forecast change group—for any significant weather
change forecast to occur during the TAF time period,
the expected conditions and time period are included
in this group. This information may be shown as from
(FM), and temporary (TEMPO). “FM” is used when a
rapid and significant change, usually within an hour, is
expected. “TEMPO” is used for temporary fluctuations
of weather, expected to last less than 1 hour.
10.	 PROB30—a given percentage that describes the
probability of thunderstorms and precipitation
occurring in the coming hours. This forecast is not
used for the first 6 hours of the 24-hour forecast.
TAF
KPIR 111130Z 1112/1212
TEMPO 1112/1114 5SM BR
FM1500 16015G25KT P6SM SCT040 BKN250
FM120000 14012KT P6SM BKN080 OVC150 PROB30
1200/1204  3SM TSRA BKN030CB
FM120400 1408KT P6SM SCT040 OVC080
TEMPO 1204/1208 3SM TSRA OVC030CB
Explanation:
Routine TAF for Pierre, South Dakota…on the 11th day of
the month, at 1130Z…valid for 24 hours from 1200Z on the
11th to 1200Z on the 12th…wind from 150° at 12 knots…
visibility greater than 6 SM…broken clouds at 9,000 feet…
temporarily, between 1200Z and 1400Z, visibility 5 SM in
mist…from 1500Z winds from 160° at 15 knots, gusting
to 25 knots visibility greater than 6 SM…clouds scattered
at 4,000 feet and broken at 25,000 feet…from 0000Z wind
from 140° at 12 knots…visibility greater than 6 SM…clouds
broken at 8,000 feet, overcast at 15,000 feet…between 0000Z
and 0400Z, there is 30 percent probability of visibility 3
SM…thunderstorm with moderate rain showers…clouds
broken at 3,000 feet with cumulonimbus clouds…from
0400Z…winds from 140° at 8 knots…visibility greater than
6 miles…clouds at 4,000 scattered and overcast at 8,000…
temporarily between 0400Z and 0800Z…visibility 3 miles…
thunderstorms with moderate rain showers…clouds overcast
at 3,000 feet with cumulonimbus clouds…end of report (=).
Aviation Forecasts
Observed weather condition reports are often used in the
creation of forecasts for the same area. A variety of different
forecast products are produced and designed to be used in the
preflight planning stage. The printed forecasts that pilots need
to be familiar with are the terminal aerodrome forecast (TAF),
aviation area forecast (FA), inflight weather advisories
(SIGMET, AIRMET), and the winds and temperatures aloft
forecast (FB).
Terminal Aerodrome Forecasts (TAF)
A TAF is a report established for the five statute mile
radius around an airport. TAF reports are usually given for
larger airports. Each TAF is valid for a 24 or 30-hour time
period and is updated four times a day at 0000Z, 0600Z,
1200Z, and 1800Z. The TAF utilizes the same descriptors
and abbreviations as used in the METAR report. The TAF
includes the following information in sequential order:
Type of report—a TAF can be either a routine forecast
(TAF) or an amended forecast (TAF AMD).
ICAO station identifier—the station identifier is the
same as that used in a METAR.
Date and time of origin—time and date (081125Z)
of TAF origination is given in the six-number code
with the first two being the date, the last four being
the time. Time is always given in UTC as denoted by
the Z following the time block.
Valid period dates and times—The TAF valid period
(0812/0912) follows the date/time of forecast origin
group. Scheduled 24 and 30 hour TAFs are issued
four times per day, at 0000, 0600, 1200, and 1800Z.
The first two digits (08) are the day of the month for
the start of the TAF. The next two digits (12) are the
starting hour (UTC). 09 is the day of the month for
the end of the TAF, and the last two digits (12) are
the ending hour (UTC) of the valid period. A forecast
period that begins at midnight UTC is annotated as 00.
If the end time of a valid period is at midnight UTC,
it is annotated as 24. For example, a 00Z TAF issued
on the 9th of the month and valid for 24 hours would
have a valid period of 0900/0924.
Forecast wind—the wind direction and speed forecast
are coded in a five-digit number group. An example
would be 15011KT. The first three digits indicate the
direction of the wind in reference to true north. The
last two digits state the windspeed in knots appended
with “KT.” Like the METAR, winds greater than 99
knots are given in three digits.
Forecast visibility—given in statute miles and may
be in whole numbers or fractions. If the forecast is
greater than six miles, it is coded as “P6SM.”

and implies there may be occurrences of severe or greater
turbulence, severe icing, low-level wind shear, and IFR
conditions. The final line of the precautionary statement alerts
the user that heights, for the most part, are MSL. Those that
are not MSL will state AGL or CIG.
Synopsis—gives a brief summary identifying the
location and movement of pressure systems, fronts,
and circulation patterns.
SYNOPSIS…LOW PRES TROF 10Z OK/TX PNHDL AREA
FCST MOV EWD INTO CNTRL-SWRN OK BY 04Z.
WRMFNT 10Z CNTRL OK-SRN AR-NRN MS FCST LIFT
NWD INTO NERN OK-NRN AR EXTRM NRN MS BY 04Z.
Explanation:
As of 1000Z, there is a low pressure trough over the Oklahoma
and Texas panhandle area, which is forecast to move eastward
into central to southwestern Oklahoma by 0400Z. A warm
front located over central Oklahoma, southern Arkansas, and
northern Mississippi at 1000Z is forecast to lift northwestward
into northeastern Oklahoma, northern Arkansas, and extreme
northern Mississippi by 0400Z.
VFR Clouds and Weather—This section lists expected
sky conditions, visibility, and weather for the next 12
hours and an outlook for the following 6 hours.
S CNTRL AND SERN TX
AGL SCT-BKN010. TOPS 030. VIS 3-5SM BR. 14-16Z
BECMG AGL SCT030. 19Z AGL SCT050.
OTLK…VFR
OK
PNDLAND NW…AGL SCT030 SCT-BKN100.
TOPS FL200.
15Z AGL SCT040 SCT100. AFT 20Z SCT TSRA DVLPG..
FEW POSS SEV. CB TOPS FL450.
OTLK…VFR
Explanation:
In south central and southeastern Texas, there is a scattered
to broken layer of clouds from 1,000 feet AGL with tops at
3,000 feet, visibility is 3 to 5 SM in mist. Between 1400Z and
1600Z, the cloud bases are expected to increase to 3,000 feet
AGL. After 1900Z, the cloud bases are expected to continue
to increase to 5,000 feet AGL and the outlook is VFR.
In northwestern Oklahoma and panhandle, the clouds are
scattered at 3,000 feet with another scattered to broken layer
at 10,000 feet AGL, with the tops at 20,000 feet. At 1500
Z, the lowest cloud base is expected to increase to 4,000
feet AGL with a scattered layer at 10,000 feet AGL. After
Area Forecasts (FA)
The FA gives a picture of clouds, general weather conditions,
and visual meteorological conditions (VMC) expected over
a large area encompassing several states. There are six areas
for which area forecasts are published in the contiguous 48
states. Area forecasts are issued three times a day and are
valid for 18 hours. This type of forecast gives information
vital to en route operations, as well as forecast information
for smaller airports that do not have terminal forecasts.
Area forecasts are typically disseminated in four sections and
include the following information:
Header—gives the location identifier of the source of
the FA, the date and time of issuance, the valid forecast
time, and the area of coverage.
DFWC FA 120945
SYNOPSIS AND VFR CLDS/WX
SYNOPSIS VALID UNTIL 130400
CLDS/WX VALID UNTIL 122200…OTLK VALID
OK TX AR LA MS AL AND CSTL WTRS
Explanation:
The area forecast shows information given by Dallas Fort
Worth, for the region of Oklahoma, Texas, Arkansas,
Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama, as well as a portion
of the Gulf coastal waters. It was issued on the 12th day
of the month at 0945. The synopsis is valid from the time
of issuance until 0400 hours on the 13th. VFR clouds and
weather information on this area forecast are valid until 2200
hours on the 12th and the outlook is valid from 2200Z on the
12th to 0400Z on the 13th.
Precautionary statements—IFR conditions, mountain
obscurations, and thunderstorm hazards are described
in this section. Statements made here regarding height
are given in MSL, and if given otherwise, AGL or
ceiling (CIG) is noted.
SEE AIRMET SIERRA FOR IFR CONDS AND MTN
OBSCN.
TS IMPLY SEV OR GTR TURB SEV ICE LLWS AND
IFR CONDS.
NON MSL HGTS DENOTED BYAGL OR CIG.
Explanation:
The area forecast covers VFR clouds and weather, so the
precautionary statement warns that AIRMET Sierra should
be referenced for IFR conditions and mountain obscuration.
The code TS indicates the possibility of thunderstorms

South
Delta Area
NW
NE
North
Central
SW
SE
NW
NE
Ozarks
Boot
Heel
SW Missouri
Lakes Area
Lake of the
Ozarks Area
Extreme
SRN
IL
SW
SE
Central
NW
NE
NW
NE
SW
SE
Central
Iowa
SW
SE
Extrm
SE
NW
NE
Northeast Lakes
Region
Upper
Mississippi
Valley
Arrowhead
Lake Superior
Shoreline
WRN Upper MI
Cntrl
Upper
MI
ERN Upper MI
Door Peninsula
Mackinac Area
NRN Highlands
The
Thumb
Saginaw
Valley
Grand
Valley
Irish Hills
Near Lake
Mi
Extrm
NW
NE
SW
SE
Near Ohio River
SW
SE
West
Cntrl
Northern
Southern
Cntrl
East
NE
West
Middle
East
Appalachian Mo
un
tains
SE
NE
NW
l
on
g

h
io

ive

Extrm
NW
SWRN
Southern
Cntrl
Cntrl
N Third
Third
ear
 La
ke
Er
ie
Lee
Lake
Erie
Lower Great
Lakes Basin
Extrm
NW
Allegheny
Plateau
NW
SW
Cntrl
NE
SE
Cntrl
Le
La
k

On
ta
rio
NRN
SRN
NE
Eastern
Shore
Coastal
Waters
NE
NW
SW
SE
Coa
st
al
lain
NE
SE
Piedmont
West
Mtns
of
SC
Co
l
 Pl
ai

NW
Mtns
Hills
of
Alabama
West
Cntrl
East
Cntrl
Extrm
SE
Extrm Southern
Georgia
Mobile
Area
FL W 85
Extrm
North
North
Central
Apalachee
Bay
South
Extrm
South
Upper
Keys
Lower Keys
Gulf

tre

Florida Straits
Coastal
Waters
Catskill
Mtns
E Cntrl
Cape Cod
st
al

la

Hudson Valley
Mohawk
Valley
West of
Catskills
Adirondack
Mtns
Champlain
Valley
Green
Mtns
N of Catskills
White Mtns
NW
NE
Coa
l
ec
tio
SE
SW
MN
IA
MI
IL
IN
MO
AR
LA
MS
AL
TN
GA
FL
SC
NC
VA
MD
DC
NJ
OH
WI
WV
PA
NY
ME
VT
NH
MA
RI
CT
Coastal Waters–from
coast outward to the
ﬂight information
region border
SW
SE
Northern
NE
Mtns
Central
Strait of Juan De Fuca
Olympic Mtns
Sacramento
Valley
Northwest
North Central
South Central
Lower
Rio
Grande
Valley
Lower
Coastal
Plain
Mid Coastal
Plain
Upper Coastal
Plain
Northwest
Texas
Puget
Sound
Cascade Mtns
Cascade Mtns
of Cascades
Mtns
NE WA
Columbia
Basin
Interior
Valley
Columbia Gorge
Blue
Mtns
Wallowa
Mtns
Mtns of
NE OR
Costal Range
Willamette Valley
Coast and
Costal Valley
High Plateau
East Slopes
WA
OR
Shasta
Siskiyous
NE CA
NRN
Sierra
Mtns
Coastal Mtns and Valleys
San Joaquin
Valley
SRN
Sierra
Mtns
Coastal Mtns and Valleys
Western
Nevada
Eastern
Nevada
Coastal
Areas
Death
Valley
Lake Tahoe
Lake
Mead
Lake
Mojave
Mojave
Desert
Antelope
Valley
Coastal Range
SRN
Deserts
Santa
Barbara
Channel
Santa Monica
Bay
Coastal Plain
Gulf of
Santa Catalina
Coacnella
and
Imperial
Valleys
Great
Basin
Colorado
River
Valley
Gilariver Valley
Mogollon Rim
Chiricahua
Mtns
White
Mtns
Little
Colorado
Valley
Grand Canyon
Four
Corners
Area
Extrm
SW
Uinta Basin
S Cntrl
Mtns
Great
Salt
Lake
Wasatch Mtns
West Central
Valleys
San Juan
Mtns
NW
Cntrl
Colorado
Mtns
So Platte Valley
NE
Palmer Lake Ridge
or Divide
Eastern Plains
Lower Arkansas Valley
SE
San Luis
Valley
North Park
Rio Grande Valley
Con
tin
al
Div
ide

Sacremento
Mtns
Sangre De Cristo
Mtns
Eastern
New Mexico
Eastern
Plains
Green River
Basin
So Central
Mtns
SW
WY
Laramie Mtns
N P
la
iv
er Valley
SE
WY
Black
Hills
NE WY
Big Horn Mtns
Big Horn
Basin
Wind River Mtns
Teton
Mtns
Sna
k

al
le
y
Central
Mtns
(Sawtooth)
Yellowstone
Park
Bitterroot Range
Flathead Valley
East
Slopes of
Cont Dvd
SWRN
Mtns
Fort Peck Reservoir
Wind River
Basin
E of Cont Dvd

iver
West of
Pecos
Big Bend
Area
East of
Pecos
Southwest
Panhandle
Northeast
Southeast
Coastal Bend
Southwest
Southeast
Panhandle
Northeast
High Plains
Flint
Hills
Marais des Cygnes Basin
Kansas River Valley
Blue River Valley
Lower
Republican
Valley
h
y
enn
 Riv

James
River
NE Lakes
Region
Rosebud
Country
Pine
Ridge Area
Big Bend
Reservoir
North of
Black
Hills
Lak
wi
s a
nd
Fra
nc

Ca
se C
lark
Dame
Reservoir
Missouri
Slope
Souris
River Valley
Sand Hills
Central Nebraska
Nebraska
pan
Handle
   Pl
tte
   River

SE
NE
CA
NV
ID
MT
ND
SD
NE
KS
OK
TX
WY
UT
CO
AZ
NM
Lake Powell
Red River Valley
Lower Mississippi Valley
CHI   Chicago
BOS  Boston
MIA  Miami
SFO
San Francisco
SLC  Salt Lake City
DFW
Dallas/Fort Worth
Lake Mich Shoreline
Figure 13-8. Area forecast region map.
2000Z, the forecast calls for scattered thunderstorms with rain
developing and a few becoming severe; the CB clouds have
tops at flight level (FL) 450 or 45,000 feet MSL.
It should be noted that when information is given in the area
forecast, locations may be given by states, regions, or specific
geological features such as mountain ranges. Figure 13-8
shows an area forecast chart with six regions of forecast,
states, regional areas, and common geographical features.

Inflight Weather Advisories
Inflight weather advisories, which are provided to en route
aircraft, are forecasts that detail potentially hazardous
weather. These advisories are also available to pilots prior
to departure for flight planning purposes. An inflight
weather advisory is issued in the form of either an AIRMET,
SIGMET, or convective SIGMET.
AIRMET
AIRMETs (WAs) are examples of inflight weather advisories
that are issued every 6 hours with intermediate updates
issued as needed for a particular area forecast region. The
information contained in an AIRMET is of operational
interest to all aircraft, but the weather section concerns
phenomena considered potentially hazardous to light aircraft
and aircraft with limited operational capabilities.
An AIRMET includes forecast of moderate icing, moderate
turbulence, sustained surface winds of 30 knots or
greater, widespread areas of ceilings less than 1,000 feet
and/or visibilities less than three miles, and extensive
mountain obscurement.
Each AIRMET bulletin has a fixed alphanumeric designator,
numbered sequentially for easy identification, beginning with
the first issuance of the day. Sierra is the AIRMET code used
to denote IFR and mountain obscuration; Tango is used to
denote turbulence, strong surface winds, and low-level wind
shear; and Zulu is used to denote icing and freezing levels.
BOSS WA 211945
AIRMET SIERRA UPDT 3 FOR IFR AND MTN OBSCN
VALID UNTIL 220200
AIRMET IFT…ME NH VT MA CT RI NY NJ AND CSTL
WTRS FROM CAR TO YSJ TO 150E ACK TO EWR TO
YOW TO CAR OCNL CIG BLW 010/VIS BLW 3SM
PCPN/BR. CONDS CONT BYD 02Z THRU 08Z

AIRMET MTN OBSCN…ME NH VT MA NY PA
FROM CAR TO MLT TO CON TO SLT TO SYR TO CAR
MTNS OCNLY OBSCD BY CLDS/PCPN/BR. CONDS
CONT BYD 02Z THRU 08Z
Explanation:
AIRMET SIERRA was issued for the Boston area at 1945Z
on the 21st day of the month. SIERRA contains information
on IFR and/or mountain obscurations. This is the third
updated issuance of this Boston AIRMET series as indicated
by “SIERRA UPDT 3” and is valid until 0200Z on the
22nd. The affected states within the BOS area are: Maine,
New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts, New York, and
Pennsylvania. Within an area bounded by: Caribou, ME;
to Saint Johns, New Brunswick; to 150 nautical miles east
of Nantucket, MA; to Newark, NJ; to Ottawa, Ontario;
to Caribou, ME. The effected states within Caribou, ME
to Millinocket, ME to Concord, NH to Slate Run, PA to
Syracuse, NY to Caribou, ME will experience ceilings
below 1,000 feet/visibility below 3 SM, precipitation/mist.
Conditions will continue beyond 0200Z through 0800Z.
SIGMET
SIGMETs (WSs) are inflight advisories concerning nonconvective weather that is potentially hazardous to all
aircraft. They report weather forecasts that include severe
icing not associated with thunderstorms, severe or extreme
turbulence or clear air turbulence (CAT) not associated with
thunderstorms, dust storms or sandstorms that lower surface
or inflight visibilities to below three miles, and volcanic ash.
SIGMETs are unscheduled forecasts that are valid for 4 hours
unless the SIGMET relates to a hurricane, in which case it
is valid for 6 hours.
A SIGMET is issued under an alphabetic identifier, from
November through Yankee. The first issuance of a SIGMET
is designated as an Urgent Weather SIGMET (UWS).
Reissued SIGMETs for the same weather phenomenon are
sequentially numbered until the weather phenomenon ends.
SFOR WS 100130
SIGMET ROME02 VALID UNTIL 100530
OR WA
FROM SEA TO PDT TO EUG TO SEA
OCNL SEV CAT BTN FL280 AND FL350 EXPCD
DUE TO JTSTR.
CONDS BGNG AFT 0200Z CONTG BYD 0530Z .
Explanation:
This is SIGMET Romeo 2, the second issuance for this
weather phenomenon. It is valid until the 10th day of the
month at 0530Z time. This SIGMET is for Oregon and
Washington, for a defined area from Seattle to Portland to
Eugene to Seattle. It calls for occasional severe clear air
turbulence between FL280 and FL350 due to the location of
the jet stream. These conditions will begin after 0200Z and
continue beyond the forecast scope of this SIGMET of 0530Z.
Convective Significant Meteorological Information
(WST)
A Convective SIGMET (WST) is an inflight weather
advisory issued for hazardous convective weather that affects
the safety of every flight. Convective SIGMETs are issued
for severe thunderstorms with surface winds greater than 50
knots, hail at the surface greater than or equal to ¾ inch in
diameter, or tornadoes. They are also issued to advise pilots
of embedded thunderstorms, lines of thunderstorms, or
thunderstorms with heavy or greater precipitation that affect
40 percent or more of a 3,000 square mile or greater region.
Convective SIGMETs are issued for each area of the
contiguous 48 states but not Alaska or Hawaii. Convective
SIGMETs are issued for the eastern (E), western (W), and
central (C) United States. Each report is issued at 55 minutes
past the hour, but special Convective SIGMETs can be
issued during the interim for any reason. Each forecast is
valid for 2 hours. They are numbered sequentially each day
from 1–99, beginning at 00Z time. If no hazardous weather
exists, the convective SIGMET is still issued; however, it
states “CONVECTIVE SIGMET…NONE.”
MKCC WST 221855
CONVECTIVE SIGMET 20C
VALID UNTIL 2055Z
ND SD
FROM 90W MOT-GFK-ABR-90W MOT
INTSFYG AREA SEV TS MOVG FROM 24045KT. TOPS
ABV FL450. WIND GUSTS TO 60KTS RPRTD.
TORNADOES…HAIL TO 2 IN… WIND GUSTS TO
65KTS
POSS ND PTN
Explanation:
Convective SIGMET was issued for the central portion of
the United States on the 22nd at 1855Z. This is the 20th
Convective SIGMET issued on the 22nd for the central
United States as indicated by “20C” and is valid until 2055Z.
The affected states are North and South Dakota, from 90
nautical miles west of Minot, ND; to Grand Forks, ND; to
Aberdeen, SD; to 90 nautical miles west of Minot, ND. An
intensifying area of severe thunderstorms moving from 240
degrees at 45 knots (to the northeast). Thunderstorm tops will
be above FL 450. Wind gusts up to 60 knots were reported.

FB KWBC 151640
DATA BASED ON 151200Z
VALID 151800Z FOR USE 1400-2100Z
TEMPS NEGATIVE ABV 24000
FB
AMA

2725+00 2625-04 2531-15 2542-27 265842
DEN

2321-04 2532-08 2434-19 2441-31 235347
Figure 13-9. Winds and temperature aloft forecast.
Also reported were tornadoes, hail to 2 inches in diameter, and
wind gusts to 65 knots possible in the North Dakota portion.
Winds and Temperature Aloft Forecast (FB)
Winds and temperatures aloft forecasts (FB) provide wind
and temperature forecasts for specific locations throughout
the United States, including network locations in Hawaii
and Alaska. The forecasts are made twice a day based on the
radiosonde upper air observations taken at 0000Z and 1200Z.
Altitudes through 12,000 feet are classified as true altitudes,
while altitudes 18,000 feet and above are classified as
altitudes and are termed flight levels. Wind direction is
always in reference to true north, and wind speed is given in
knots. The temperature is given in degrees Celsius. No winds
are forecast when a given level is within 1,500 feet of the
station elevation. Similarly, temperatures are not forecast for
any station within 2,500 feet of the station elevation.
If the wind speed is forecast to be greater than 99 knots but
less than 199 knots, the computer adds 50 to the direction
and subtracts 100 from the speed. To decode this type of data
group, the reverse must be accomplished. For example, when
the data appears as “731960,” subtract 50 from the 73 and
add 100 to the 19, and the wind would be 230° at 119 knots
with a temperature of –60 °C. If the wind speed is forecast to
be 200 knots or greater, the wind group is coded as 99 knots.
For example, when the data appears as “7799,” subtract 50
from 77 and add 100 to 99, and the wind is 270° at 199 knots
or greater. When the forecast wind speed is calm, or less than
5 knots, the data group is coded “9900,” which means light
and variable. [Figure 13-9]
Explanation of Figure 13-9:
The heading indicates that this FB was transmitted on the
15th of the month at 1640Z and is based on the 1200Z upper
air data. The valid time is 1800Z on the same day and should
be used for the period between 1400Z and 2100Z. The
heading also indicates that the temperatures above FL240
are negative. Therefore, the minus sign will be omitted for
all forecast temperatures above FL240.
A four-digit data group shows the wind direction in reference
to true north and the wind speed in knots. The elevation at
Amarillo, Texas (AMA) is 3,605 feet, so the lowest reportable
altitude is 6,000 feet for the forecast winds. In this case,
“2714” means the wind is forecast to be from 270° at a speed
of 14 knots.
A six-digit group includes the forecast temperature aloft.
The elevation at Denver (DEN) is 5,431 feet, so the lowest
reportable altitude is 9,000 feet for the winds and temperature
forecast. In this case, “2321-04” indicates the wind is forecast to
be from 230° at a speed of 21 knots with a temperature of –4 °C.
Weather Charts
Weather charts are graphic charts that depict current or
forecast weather. They provide an overall picture of the
United States and should be used in the beginning stages of
flight planning. Typically, weather charts show the movement
of major weather systems and fronts. Surface analysis,
weather depiction, and significant weather prognostic charts
are sources of current weather information. Significant
weather prognostic charts provide an overall forecast weather
picture.
Surface Analysis Chart
The surface analysis chart depicts an analysis of the current
surface weather. [Figure 13-10] This chart is transmitted
every 3 hours and covers the contiguous 48 states and
adjacent areas. A surface analysis chart shows the areas of
high and low pressure, fronts, temperatures, dew points, wind
directions and speeds, local weather, and visual obstructions.
Surface weather observations for reporting points across
the United States are also depicted on this chart. Each of
these reporting points is illustrated by a station model.
[Figure 13-11] A station model includes:
Sky cover—the station model depicts total sky cover
and is shown as clear, scattered, broken, overcast, or
obscured/partially obscured.
Sea level pressure—given in three digits to the nearest
tenth of a millibar (mb). For 1,000 mbs or greater,
prefix a 10 to the three digits. For less than 1,000 mbs,
prefix a 9 to the three digits.
Pressure change/tendency—pressure change in tenths
of mb over the past 3 hours. This is depicted directly
below the sea level pressure.
Dew point—given in degrees Fahrenheit.
Present weather—over 100 different standard weather
symbols are used to describe the current weather.
Temperature—given in degrees Fahrenheit.
Wind—true direction of wind is given by the wind
pointer line, indicating the direction from which the
wind is blowing. A short barb is equal to 5 knots of
wind, a long barb is equal to 10 knots of wind, and a
pennant is equal to 50 knots.

Figure 13-10. Surface analysis chart.
1. Total sky cover:
Overcast
2. Temperature/dew point:
34 °F/32 °F
3. Wind:
From the northwest at 20 knots (relative to true north)
4. Present weather:
Continuous light snow
5. Sea level pressure:
1014.7 millibars (mb)

Note: Pressure is always shown in 3 digits to the nearest tenth of a millibar.

For 1,000 mb or greater, prefix a “10” to the 3 digits

For less than 1,000 mb, prefix a “9” to the 3 digits
6. Pressure change in past 3 hours:
Increased steadily or unsteadily by 2.8 mb
Examples of Wind Speed and Direction Plots
NE/5 kts
SW/10 kts
N/15 kts
W/50 kts
S/60 kts
Calm
28 /
32**
Pressure change in past 3 hours
Pressure tendency
Sea level pressure
Wind speed
Wind direction
Temperature
Total sky cover
Present weather
Dew point
Figure 13-11. Sample station model and weather chart symbols.

Figure 13-12. Weather depiction chart.
Weather Depiction Chart
A weather depiction chart details surface conditions as
derived from METAR and other surface observations. The
weather depiction chart is prepared and transmitted by
computer every 3 hours beginning at 0100Z time and is valid
data for the forecast period. It is designed to be used for flight
planning by giving an overall picture of the weather across
the United States. [Figure 13-12]
The weather depiction chart also provides a graphic display
of IFR, VFR, and marginal VFR (MVFR) weather. Areas of
IFR conditions (ceilings less than 1,000 feet and visibility
less than three miles) are shown by a hatched area outlined
by a smooth line. MVFR regions (ceilings 1,000 to 3,000
feet, visibility 3 to 5 miles) are shown by a nonhatched area
outlined by a smooth line. Areas of VFR (no ceiling or ceiling
greater than 3,000 feet and visibility greater than five miles)
are not outlined. Also plotted are fronts, troughs, and squall
lines from the previous hours surface analysis chart.
Weather depiction charts show a modified station model
that provides sky conditions in the form of total sky cover,
ceiling height, weather, and obstructions to visibility, but
does not include winds or pressure readings like the surface
analysis chart. A bracket ( ] ) symbol to the right of the station
indicates the observation was made by an automated station.
Significant Weather Prognostic Charts
Significant weather prognostic charts are available for lowlevel significant weather from the surface to FL 240 (24,000
feet), also referred to as the 400 mb level and high-level
significant weather from FL 250 to FL 630 (25,000 to 63,000
feet). The primary concern of this discussion is the low-level
significant weather prognostic chart.
The low-level chart is is a forecast of aviation weather
hazards, primarily intended to be used as a guidance product
for briefing the VFR pilot. The forecast domain covers the 48
contiguous states, southern Canada and the coastal waters for
altitudes below 24,000 ft. Low altitude Significant Weather
charts are issued four times daily and are valid at fixed times:
0000, 0600, 1200, and 1800 UTC. Each chart is divided on
the left and right into 12 and 24 hour forecast intervals (based
on the current NAM model available).

Figure 13-13. Significant weather prognostic chart.
Effective September 1, 2015, the four-panel Low Level
SFC-240 chart was replaced with a two-panel chart. The new
two-panel chart will be the same as the top two panels in the
former four-panel chart, depicting the freezing level and areas
of IFR, MVFR, and moderate or greater turbulence. The bottom
two panels of the chart have been removed. In lieu of these
bottom two panels, an enhanced surface chart that includes
fronts, pressure, precipitation type, precipitation intensity, and
weather type, is displayed. The green precipitation polygons
will be replaced by shaded precipitation areas using the
National Digital Forecast Database (NDFD) weather grid.
Figure 13-13 depicts the new two-panel significant weather
prognostic chart, as well as the symbols typically used to
depict precipitation. The two panels depict freezing levels,
turbulence, and low cloud ceilings and/or restrictions to
visibility (shown as contoured areas of MVFR and IFR
conditions). These charts enable the pilot to pictorially
evaluate existing and potential weather hazards they may
encounter. Pilots can balance weather phenomena with
their aircraft capability and skill set resulting in aeronautical
decision-making appropriate to the flight. Prognostic charts
are an excellent source of information for preflight planning;
however, this chart should be viewed in light of current
conditions and specific local area forecasts.
The 36- and 48-hour significant weather prognostic chart is
an extension of the 12- and 24-hour forecast. This chart is
issued twice a day. It typically contains forecast positions and
characteristics of pressure patterns, fronts, and precipitation.
An example of a 36- and 48-hour surface prognostic chart is
shown in Figure 13-14.
ATC Radar Weather Displays
Although ATC systems cannot always detect the presence
or absence of clouds, they can often determine the intensity
of a precipitation area, but the specific character of that area
(snow, rain, hail, VIRGA, etc.) cannot be determined. For
this reason, ATC refers to all weather areas displayed on ATC
radar scopes as “precipitation.”
ARTCC facilities normally use a Weather and Radar
Processor (WARP) to display a mosaic of data obtained
from multiple NEXRAD sites. There is a time delay between
actual conditions and those displayed to the controller.
The precipitation data on the ARTCC controller’s display
could be up to 6 minutes old. The WARP processor is only
used in
